you know, the dumas people sent us an email regarding the agenda moving forward and the timeline they proposed for the completion of the garden shaft. i think we were surprised by it. right. yep. as a new morning begins on oak island, brothers rick and marty lagina, along with their partner craig tester, have called an urgent meeting in the war room regarding the ongoing difficulties of deepening the garden shaft in the money pit area. the new timelines, of course, part of it is the issue with the weather. there\'s a lot of voids behind the shaft. there\'s all kinds of ancillary issues. 	CoOI S11E10.1
there\'s a lot of voids behind the shaft. there\'s all kinds of ancillary issues. it\'s a bit troubling. yeah. yeah, this is a disconcerting piece of news, right, craig, because, um, i mean, the garden shaft was probably one of the big things this year that we wanted to get done. but the bottom line is the date they now have for completion of just the deepening has moved way off into the fall. at least now we get to see where the water is coming from. source of the water. for the past three weeks, representatives from duma\'s contracting limited have been working tirelessly to halt a mysterious inflow of water into the structure, which has a current depth of 87 feet. 	CoOI S11E10.1
been working tirelessly to halt a mysterious inflow of water into the structure, which has a current depth of 87 feet. while the team is uncertain whether or not the water flow is associated with the legendary flood traps that have plagued treasure hunters in the money pit it has delayed their efforts to extend the garden shaft down to a final depth of some 95 feet. it is here where the team is on course to breach a seven foot high wooden tunnel. a tunnel that leads due west into the so-called baby blob, where high trace evidence of gold, silver, and other metals have been detected through water testing between depths of 80 and 120 feet. 	CoOI S11E10.1
trace evidence of gold, silver, and other metals have been detected through water testing between depths of 80 and 120 feet. now. rick, marty, craig, and the team must find another way to reach the valuables that they have all but proven to be buried deep in the money pit area. let\'s call up our partners and let\'s talk to them. hello guys. hey guys. welcome back to the war room. hello. hello marty. well, we\'re in receipt of your email, cameron and tony, you know, about the anticipated completion of the garden shaft and you know, clearly we\'re disappointed, but we have to deal with it and so we want to do damage control. 	CoOI S11E10.1
and you know, clearly we\'re disappointed, but we have to deal with it and so we want to do damage control. so that\'s point one. yeah, understood marty. you know, we have tried to mitigate, you know, that. that water ingress as much as possible, but it has delayed us from achieving where we\'d hoped to be at this point. right. so, you know, our focus has been on making sure that that shaft is sustainable moving forward. we would like to continue the work extending the shaft. we would like to go to 95 feet so we can absolutely determine whether or not it\'s original depositional work. 	CoOI S11E10.1
we would like to go to 95 feet so we can absolutely determine whether or not it\'s original depositional work. as of right now, we\'re not gonna deviate from that. yeah. we want to go deep enough to be able to put that drill down hole and go horizontal at those depths. and i guess the other question is, though, will the equipment that\'s going to be here be able to plug those wells after we\'re drilling without water issues continuing? yeah, so we\'ve got the manova fellas coming in, and they\'re going to give us a hand with a geofoam filling, and that\'ll fill the voids in behind the shaft and stabilize it again. 	CoOI S11E10.1
give us a hand with a geofoam filling, and that\'ll fill the voids in behind the shaft and stabilize it again. that\'ll be another week from now. ok. if dumas can safely extend the garden shaft into the tunnel below, the team can use a probe drill capable of reaching up to 40 feet outside of the structure to potentially pinpoint the location of the precious metals that have been detected. but first, representatives from dumas will utilize geofoam, an industrial-grade material that can expand up to 40 times its size to fill voids in the walls of the structure, which will stabilize the shaft and hopefully stop the current flooding. 	CoOI S11E10.1
size to fill voids in the walls of the structure, which will stabilize the shaft and hopefully stop the current flooding. it remains extremely important to be able to utilize the garden shaft for horizontal drilling. we want to find this treasure if it exists, and the garden shaft remains highly valuable in that exercise. if we can get the 40 plus feet out. we can find out what\'s outside in an 80 foot diameter circle. yeah, we\'re going to work together to solve the challenges, always. fair enough, love to hear it. okay, gentlemen, appreciate it. let\'s make a shaft. 	CoOI S11E10.1
fair enough, love to hear it. okay, gentlemen, appreciate it. let\'s make a shaft. thank you. take care guys, thank you. take care, bye bye. okay. all right, well, we are on the same page with those guys. so that\'s good. yeah, i think at this point, the possibility of doing the caisson work is looming large. but where? where? i would like to pump aladdin\'s cave, and if the metal\'s hold up, i\'d vote for that. you could maybe put a can over it. yeah. nearly 60 feet southwest of the garden shaft and the baby blob. the oak island team has also been investigating another spot in the money pit area where something of great value could be buried. 	CoOI S11E10.1
island team has also been investigating another spot in the money pit area where something of great value could be buried. a large cavern located some 150 feet deep that marty has dubbed aladdin\'s cave. due to the evidence of wooden structures and gold that has been detected there through water sample testing. who\'s that sitting right on the end of it? right there. it looks like a bolt. in addition, the team has obtained compelling sonar and underwater images inside of aladdin\'s cave, suggesting that it could be a man-made chamber. if they can recover definitive evidence that it contains treasure, the team has the option to dig a large diameter steel case on, as they have done in the past in the hopes of retrieving it. 	CoOI S11E10.1
to dig a large diameter steel case on, as they have done in the past in the hopes of retrieving it. i\'ve been a proponent of aladdin\'s cave ever since we found it, as saying this needs to be investigated. what is clear is we need to get a better image of the whole thing. so we need to drill another hole. we need to think about putting a caisson down into this thing. well, i mean, i\'m game for looking into caissons. i think it\'s a great idea. there\'s a lot of work to do there, so let\'s head on out. 	CoOI S11E10.1
i think it\'s a great idea. there\'s a lot of work to do there, so let\'s head on out. all right, ok. well said. later that afternoon. so bill, pull that back a little bit if you would. yep. in the southeast corner of the swamp, rick lagina, along with his nephew alex, gary drayton, and billy gerhardt continue searching for important clues near the potentially 500-year-old stone road. keep gary busy. since first uncovering this massive feature in 2020, the team has found critical clues nearby. such as ancient pieces of wooden barrels and a stone pathway, suggesting that it may have been used long ago to unload valuable cargo onto oak island. 	CoOI S11E10.1
barrels and a stone pathway, suggesting that it may have been used long ago to unload valuable cargo onto oak island. now, the team hopes to find more of the stone road and any valuable clues that may help solve the 229-year-old mystery. there\'s more chain. oh, look at that chain, yeah. more chain. good eye. yep, look. that\'s all connected. and this looks old. that does, yeah. yeah. this is definitely not factory-made. this is crude. hey, uncle rick. you might want to come look at this. seems like the larger one would be maybe to anchor that, and then the smaller ones would be for whatever you\'re doing. 	CoOI S11E10.1
like the larger one would be maybe to anchor that, and then the smaller ones would be for whatever you\'re doing. yeah. it\'s hard to tell because of all the crusty stuff. there you go, mate. if we\'re looking for signs of loading and unloading, you need some chains like this. wow. yeah, that\'s very cool. and you know what that reminds me of is a multi-point. you know what i mean? you have this ring and then you have your three points off of there, four points. that\'s what that is. you have a three-point hitch. it\'s going to be able to pull across even something like a beach. 	CoOI S11E10.1
it\'s a piece of wood. while excavating near the stone road in the southeast corner of the swamp, metal detection expert gary drayton, alex lagina, and billy gerhardt have just found a potentially important clue. yep. there\'s definitely some iron there. you can see it. iron oxide. yep. might be the top of the spike. i\'ll set this aside too. yeah, please. well, let\'s see what else we can get out. yeah. yeah, we\'ve still got another in here. that there might be. see if it\'s there. sick. you got some... oh, look! oh. that\'s the pointy end of the spike. 	CoOI S11E10.2
see if it\'s there. sick. you got some... oh, look! oh. that\'s the pointy end of the spike. look at the black spike in the wood. this is one of those old rose-head spikes. by the look at the top, that bevel on it. and that would make it pretty old, right? oh, yeah. yeah, this is old. yeah, a spike like that looks like it\'s from the 1700s or older. great. this actually might be a smaller ship spike, a wharf pin. this corner of the swamp is the one that just keeps on giving. yeah. it might indicate that it was part of a structure, right? 	CoOI S11E10.2
yeah. it might indicate that it was part of a structure, right? yeah, it\'ll help us with our database. yeah. an iron spike embedded in wood? could billy gerhart be correct that they offer evidence of a buried structure? before his passing in 2016, legendary oak island treasure hunter fred nolan reported to rick lagina that he had once found evidence of a dam feature in this same area, a dam that may have been used to artificially create the swamp. could the team have just found evidence of what fred believed is hidden beneath the south shore road? this is going to mean a lot to my uncle rick. 	CoOI S11E10.2
this is going to mean a lot to my uncle rick. so i want to see what we keep digging up. well, that was a heck of a dig, mate. we\'ve got a shitload of finds. we\'re going to be taking a lot of artifacts back to the lab. absolutely. yeah. all right, ready for the next scoop. ok. as operations continue in the swamp and in the money pit area. as we\'re all keenly aware, this structure in lot 5 has turned into a much bigger rectangular structure. yeah. rick has joined his brother marty, jack begley, archaeologist laird niven, and argue metallurgist emma culligan in the interpretive center. 	CoOI S11E10.2
rick has joined his brother marty, jack begley, archaeologist laird niven, and argue metallurgist emma culligan in the interpretive center. if it\'s literally as big as we think it is, then it\'s a big deal. yeah. it\'s a large structure. and we\'re starting to find more artifacts. emma and laird have conducted scientific analysis artifact as well as a carved stone that were found one week ago in the large foundation that was recently discovered below the circular stone depression on lot 5, located on the western side of the island. so this is what jamie called the carved stone. i have an idea of what it is. 	CoOI S11E10.2
so this is what jamie called the carved stone. i have an idea of what it is. so what is this? it\'s a whetstone. oh, is it a whetstone? yeah, for sharpening tools. i would expect knives. yeah? you can see the grooves, right? yeah. that\'s a technique that hasn\'t changed in forever. no, exactly. although the practice of sharpening tools dates back thousands of years, whetstones commonly made from sandstone or slate have been used since the first century ad. i would say that is the working side, but the real tell, i got emma to xrf it. okay, so you get to know composition? 	CoOI S11E10.2
okay, so you get to know composition? oh, even better than that. earlier this morning, emma analyzed the artifacts using two devices. an x-ray fluorescence spectrometer that uses x-rays to identify the elements that make up an object\'s composition, and the skyscan1273 ct scanner, which emits non-destructive radiation to penetrate built-up corrosion, revealing finer physical details. with the xrf, we can actually see the iron content where... they sharpened the... they scraped? yeah, they sharpened their tools or knives. that makes it basically definitive. yeah. this was a sharpening tool. exactly. okay, well, i am curious about the next one. jamie called this a decorative piece of iron. 	CoOI S11E10.2
exactly. okay, well, i am curious about the next one. jamie called this a decorative piece of iron. and she thought it was ornately decorating a box. yeah. and there might have been a design on it too. yeah. it looks like a crochet hook. ct scan does show us it used to be straight. oh, okay. so that\'s with its current iron state. so the red is the oxidized irons and the original iron remaining is actually this blue color. there\'s not a lot left. no. i don\'t see any decoration. we have singularly unique pieces on phone association with that feature, then we should compare that metallurgical analysis with others phone at the site. 	CoOI S11E10.2
unique pieces on phone association with that feature, then we should compare that metallurgical analysis with others phone at the site. let me just run a comparison real quick. but if it matches, that would be meaningful. it\'s aluminum to silicon ratio. it matches 17th century english. just looking at the spectra and the composition, i\'d say it\'s similar to phips just not 100%. i like that. so far this year, the team has unearthed several metal artifacts in the mysterious foundation on lot 5 that have been scientifically connected to the 17th century english politician and privateer, sir william phips a man who is believed by some. 	CoOI S11E10.2
been scientifically connected to the 17th century english politician and privateer, sir william phips a man who is believed by some. to have buried up to 50 tons of spanish silver and gold in the money pit back in 1687. you can see the two structural failures. could the team have found another critical clue to identify who constructed the mysterious feature on lot 5? if so, might that also explain the high trace evidence of precious metals that have been detected in the baby blob or in aladdin\'s cave? we have a match between metallurgy of items found on lot 5 feature with artifacts from the phips residence in maine. 	CoOI S11E10.2
we have a match between metallurgy of items found on lot 5 feature with artifacts from the phips residence in maine. you can\'t throw out this sir william phips connection to oak island. i think it was buried for a reason. i think the key lies beneath the rocks at the very bottom. yeah. these things in front of us indicate it\'s important to keep going on. but in order to do that, we\'ve got to get out back. let\'s do it. all right. so laird, thank you. emma, thank you. thank you. see you. take care. let\'s do it. morning. 	CoOI S11E10.2
all right. so laird, thank you. emma, thank you. thank you. see you. take care. let\'s do it. morning. 15-ish more feet to go gentlemen and we\'re away to the races. all right. in the money pit area, alex lagina and other members of the team are overseeing the drilling of borehole kl-15 a borehole where they hope to breach a mysterious cavern known as aladdin\'s cave located some 150 feet below ground. this is the most unique feature we found underground in the money pit area. if we see something in there worth recovering, we\'ll get in it. this is gonna be 148. 	CoOI S11E10.2
if we see something in there worth recovering, we\'ll get in it. this is gonna be 148. 148? yeah, 24 run. well, i don\'t know. let\'s carve it up and have a look. that is bizarre. we seem to have a line of demarcation right here between this very, very fine material and that relatively coarse material, but we should have went into the open cavern. hey, mike, how you doing? not too good of news. uh-oh. really? yeah. so we didn\'t hit it, eh? we did. oh, you did hit it? yeah, probably about 147. what? yeah. and if you look at this stuff, it\'s like this is what\'s getting pulled into my case. 	CoOI S11E10.2
we don\'t have real good news regarding the cave. yeah. after being alerted of a potentially devastating development in the large cavern known as aladdin\'s cave in the money pit area. i guess the short explanation is there\'s reason to believe that the cavity may have collapsed. what? rick lagina has gathered members of the team in the war room to discuss the situation with marty lagina and craig tester, who join them. via video conference. so here\'s what happened. we drilled down to about 146-ish feet, and we got some infill. obviously, if it collapsed, the material had to come from somewhere. 	CoOI S11E10.3
obviously, if it collapsed, the material had to come from somewhere. i think that cave is important. so i\'d be disappointed if the whole roof fell in. yeah. plausible location for some sort of treasure would be in aladdin\'s cave because of the fact that there are. of precious metals dissolved in the water and high amounts of organic material, which indicate perhaps wood in the water. we\'re not going to give up on a latin\'s cave. it\'s possible it wasn\'t, like, a total collapse of the feature. maybe one of the walls gave way and there was a bit of a slump. 	CoOI S11E10.3
maybe one of the walls gave way and there was a bit of a slump. having said that, we have a lot of data, and i think we need to find a way to assimilate it all between the camera, the sonar... let\'s get a very competent understanding of what we have currently and then decide how to move forward. i agree with rick. let\'s get, i don\'t know, maybe paul and maybe steve to just look at all the data and see what we got. given what our current understanding of the cave is, if a collapse has happened or a partial collapse, then we need to understand it completely and figure out what we can do moving forward. 	CoOI S11E10.3
happened or a partial collapse, then we need to understand it completely and figure out what we can do moving forward. so it\'s imperative. gather all the information we have about aladdin\'s cave. and from there, we may be able to try to learn more about it. there\'s a bit of a bright spot, actually, which is that the other hole was one where we got another vantage point in the cave for the 3d sonar. and when we put the data together, maybe we\'ll be able to say exactly what\'s down there. we\'ll see. all right, guys. thanks for the update. 	CoOI S11E10.3
we\'ll see. all right, guys. thanks for the update. let\'s just see what the data suggests. yeah. all right. see you. talk to you later. bye. all right. later that afternoon. we\'re going to remove these stones. ideally, we want to see a nice wall. yeah. jack begley has joined archaeologist laird niven and other members of the team as they continue investigating the mysterious foundation located on lot 5 for not only more clues that might explain why it was built, but also to determine if it contains something of value. we still don\'t know exactly what this is. one way to find out. 	CoOI S11E10.3
we still don\'t know exactly what this is. one way to find out. well, let\'s keep digging and figure out what it is, yeah. while laird, jack, fiona, moja, and lindy clear soil and debris away from the stones to expose more of the structure, jamie and helen will sift the collected spoils for artifacts and clues. yeah, so laird, we\'ve got this piece of ceramic from up there. there\'s no glaze on it. there could be white salt glaze. i think it\'s stoneware. wait, it\'s just mid-16s to mid-17, hundreds. i like that. find the rest of the place. yeah, we\'ll do. 	CoOI S11E10.3
wait, it\'s just mid-16s to mid-17, hundreds. i like that. find the rest of the place. yeah, we\'ll do. thanks. we\'re finding a lot of evidence that this feature, it could well be related to william phips but why was it there? and the obvious connection would be with the money pit, if you accept the assumption that that was a large scale operation. i\'m hoping as we get deeper, we\'re going to find even more evidence to who built it. hey, jamie. so as i\'m in here, i\'m noticing that i\'m not finding any more rocks out here. so it almost looks like the wall, maybe it\'s ending here. 	CoOI S11E10.3
so it almost looks like the wall, maybe it\'s ending here. hey, laird. kind of getting interesting over here. if you look at the angle perpendicular to the possible wall there, it could be the entrance to a cellar, maybe. it could. it could be the staircase. that\'s interesting. a possible staircase? if it really does lead to yet another buried level of the mysterious structure, then just what might it contain? it\'s starting to look like something. i\'ll jump back in there. all righty. stone structures and features like that are really interesting for us because they can tell us a bigger picture story. 	CoOI S11E10.3
oh, wow. you have got to see this. isn\'t that gorgeous? oh, my goodness. oh, nice. while investigating a possible staircase that may lead to another hidden level of the stone structure on lot 5... oh, wow. that\'s really neat. ..archaeologist jamie kubba has just made a potentially important discovery. it\'s a gorgeous, decorated bead. what? what would that be made out of? glass. that\'s what it looks like. you think it\'s venetian glass? i don\'t know yet. what would be the telltale sign that it is venetian? size, technique, the chemistry. it\'s actually relatively rare. whoa. decorative glass beads have been traded among cultures, dating back thousands of years to the times of ancient egypt. 	CoOI S11E10.4
whoa. decorative glass beads have been traded among cultures, dating back thousands of years to the times of ancient egypt. however, in 1470 ad, glassmakers in venice, italy, developed a new technique for mass producing glass beads that became renowned throughout europe and asia, as they were not only used to adorn clothing and religious relics, but were also exchanged as a high valued form of currency. so we can get a rather definitive date off of this. that\'s what we\'re hoping. this is an important artifact. and i think it\'s gonna pull the date back. yeah. is it possible that the team has found a potentially 500-year-old venetian bead in the stone foundation on lot 5? 	CoOI S11E10.4
is it possible that the team has found a potentially 500-year-old venetian bead in the stone foundation on lot 5? if so, what is the answer? we\'ll find out in a minute. could it offer evidence that the feature is even older than the team previously thought possible? the surprising thing is the amount of different types of artifacts that are popping up. that means that this was a heavily occupied area for quite some time. so why has it remained hidden for so long? this is the first beam we\'ve found. i hope we find more. yeah, absolutely. that afternoon. 	CoOI S11E10.4
this is the first beam we\'ve found. i hope we find more. yeah, absolutely. that afternoon. i like the look of this material. in the southeast corner of the swamp, jack begley has joined metal detection expert gary drayton and billy gerhardt to continue searching for additional clues and evidence of buried structures near the massive stone road. very good. i think it\'s here. it\'s a little bit of some scrappy signal, but we\'ll see what we got. coming out. here it is. oh, wow! and we have got something really, really cool. yeah. look at the size of that. i believe that that is some kind of fastener. 	CoOI S11E10.4
yeah. look at the size of that. i believe that that is some kind of fastener. yeah. and that looks like it\'s raw iron. you know, we\'re talking 1700s or older with this. brilliant. a potentially ancient iron fastener? could it be related to the stone road, which may have once been part of a ship\'s wharf, or... could it be more evidence of the buried dam feature that fred nolan claimed to have found in this area more than three decades ago? i can\'t wait until it\'s cleaned up in the lab and we can see what it really is. 	CoOI S11E10.4
i can\'t wait until it\'s cleaned up in the lab and we can see what it really is. that is a beauty. come here, me little beauty. oh. all right, we\'ll bag it and keep scanning. sweet find, gary. morning craig and members of the team meet with blacksmithing expert carmen legge in the interpretive center to get his assessment of several artifacts that have been recovered this week near the stone road in the swamp. where would you like to start? this fastener that\'s inside the wood. i\'m looking at it and i see one, two handmade nails inserted alongside of the bigger item. 	CoOI S11E10.4
i\'m looking at it and i see one, two handmade nails inserted alongside of the bigger item. any idea on what it might have been used for, just based on that? a lot of times things were driven into walls where you needed to hang lanterns for light in tight spaces, like underground, to illuminate the space. could harmon lake be correct that this fastener may have been used to aid in the building of a structure in the southeast corner of the swamp? if so, could it be more evidence that the swamp  was artificially made as fred nolan believed? 	CoOI S11E10.4
if so, could it be more evidence that the swamp  was artificially made as fred nolan believed? it makes the next finds we\'re going to show you even more interesting. this is a big piece of iron. okay. this is not a spike. it\'s a tool. oh. so is it a chisel? what is it? no, it\'s called a set. it would be used to drive in pins to down flush or even countersink. yeah, yeah. might set planking in a ship, perhaps. in the timber construction of the ship? yes. on what date would you give something like this? 	CoOI S11E10.4
in the timber construction of the ship? yes. on what date would you give something like this? oh, i\'m going to say 16 to the late 1700s. there\'s always been the speculation that the ship foundered in the swamp and that it was covered up. so why were they there? and are there any artifacts at a greater depth? maybe craig, you can help me sort of straighten this out. okay. well, we\'ve got a big central link here, ring with three chains coming off of it. this hook is very old. and why is that? because the hooks made in the later time periods had a curve in the shape. 	CoOI S11E10.4
1650, and i would even go back to the 1500s on that. whoa. oh, wow. in the oak island interpretive center, blacksmithing expert carmen legge has just given his expert opinion that the large hook found one day ago in the southeast corner of the swamp could be more than 500 years old. the design or the stylistic? design and the way to the chain itself. from here to the ring is also the same time period as the hook. wow. now, each one of these links are handmade. however, the three chains on the end here are all machine-made. mm-hmm. 	CoOI S11E10.5
now, each one of these links are handmade. however, the three chains on the end here are all machine-made. mm-hmm. really? so basically what you\'re saying then, and this was cannibaled together, if you will, and an older piece was attached to a modern piece. what would, let\'s forget this chain, what would that have been used for? a set up like this with three chains fastened to a central link was used to lift or drag things. a lot of times they would hang from a boom to load a cargo onto a harbor, like a chest or a trunk. 	CoOI S11E10.5
of times they would hang from a boom to load a cargo onto a harbor, like a chest or a trunk. is it possible that the original use of this hook and at least part of the chain connected to it were used to move valuable cargo from a ship onto the stone road and then to somewhere on oak island? as much as five centuries ago. if so, who modified the chain at a later time? and was it repurposed in order to hide something else of value here as well? i think at this point, given the amount of artifacts that have been recovered at the swamp\'s edge that might be related to ship activities, there\'s reason to believe that there was an old wharf there. 	CoOI S11E10.5
the swamp\'s edge that might be related to ship activities, there\'s reason to believe that there was an old wharf there. so if you found such a structure, it had to be. closely associated with the original work. we may find more, and we may find something that help us connect the dots. carmen, we thank you very much for your insight, and you haven\'t heard the last of us. oh, very good. thank you. take care. see you, carmen. it\'s interesting. yeah, it is. later that afternoon. guys, this is gonna be really interesting. we\'re gonna talk about the fabled aladdin\'s cave. 	CoOI S11E10.5
later that afternoon. guys, this is gonna be really interesting. we\'re gonna talk about the fabled aladdin\'s cave. in the war room, rick... marty and craig have gathered members of the team for a follow-up meeting regarding the mysterious cavern located some 150 feet deep in the money pit area, known as aladdin\'s cave. these gentlemen have done a deep dive into it, and we eagerly await your findings. ok, so we did several sonar scans and video scans for this cave anomaly. we tagged into it in a couple of different boreholes. because the team fears that part of the cave may have collapsed earlier this week. 	CoOI S11E10.5
because the team fears that part of the cave may have collapsed earlier this week. paul troutman, surveyor steve guptill, and geoscientist dr. ian spooner have further processed all of the visual and water sampling data that was previously collected inside the feature in order to determine not only if it could be manmade, but also if it might contain something of great value. so i think i\'m gonna jump into the videos. on the left. is what we recorded on the right is prohawk\'s version. geez. the video files, which were originally recorded earlier this year, have been refined by prohawk technology group, a company that specializes in the enhancement of images that were originally captured in harsh or low-lit environments. 	CoOI S11E10.5
prohawk technology group, a company that specializes in the enhancement of images that were originally captured in harsh or low-lit environments. yeah, so this is what everybody noticed. the bolt. yeah. it\'s something that looked completely different from anything else we\'ve seen. well, there is a little flat area around it, too, which is different than the rest. oh. does that make more sense that it\'s human-made? why would a bolt be there? it could be stuck in a piece of wood like we find. so let\'s keep going. i think there\'s a feature that we want to see. there. we were looking for right angles. 	CoOI S11E10.5
i wonder if this is the opening that we\'re looking for. well, the flat surface in the corner, to me, could be potentially manmade. it might be. in the oak island war room, rick, marty, craig, and members of the team have just seen enhanced video evidence of a potentially manmade entrance connected to the large cavern known as aladdin\'s cave, located approximately 150 feet deep. in the money pit area. we do see some right angles. right angles generally don\'t exist in nature, but it could be partially collapsed. the magnitude of it is yet to be determined. there\'s more, right? 	CoOI S11E10.6
the magnitude of it is yet to be determined. there\'s more, right? there is. there you go. so this here is what we deem to be the possible opening, heading westward. and so i will show you the sonar, and it sort of confirms that. ok. so what you\'re looking at here, is a bird\'s-eye view of the cave. north is up, just for reference. mm-hmm. ok? so when we were westward, and you could see that opening. yeah. i\'m going to change some color here, too, and jump down. so the opening is right here. ok. the sonar images are quite beautiful, and it certainly suggested a possible way in. 	CoOI S11E10.6
ok. the sonar images are quite beautiful, and it certainly suggested a possible way in. that\'s important. if you can\'t get in, nothing can be in there. so when we look down at the cavity, we\'ve got a few different things to show. so from this point to this point is about 25 feet. north-south is about 15. and the deepest portion of the cavity, right here, is about 10 feet deep. ok. and you can see that the cave sits nicely at 150 feet. and you can see somewhat of an opening heading east, somewhat of an opening heading west. 	CoOI S11E10.6
and you can see somewhat of an opening heading east, somewhat of an opening heading west. right. perfect. ok, so ian, what does that tell you? to me, i see this connected to some man-made features, but the bottom line is, is it\'s collecting gold and silver values in that cavity and the wood. yeah. so either the wood\'s in there, or is it connected to a structure where wood is? right. and is that where the metals are coming from too? right. yeah. when you guys are ready, we\'ve got one more video. okey dokey. go for it. so last video, we\'re looking into the cave here, so we\'re just coming down into it. 	CoOI S11E10.6
go for it. so last video, we\'re looking into the cave here, so we\'re just coming down into it. so this is in the southern edge of the cave. there\'s a look at the floor. looks like it might be sort of collapsed around the debris all falling in. i\'d say this thing has collapsed over time. yeah. maybe it hides the evidence of what you\'re looking for, right? mm-hmm. i\'d really like to put a case on in that because i want to bring some of that material up and wash through it. because if there is bits of wood or anything in there, then it could lead on to more discoveries. 	CoOI S11E10.6
because if there is bits of wood or anything in there, then it could lead on to more discoveries. yeah, i agree with that. ok, let\'s do that. right. i would say so. you would? yeah. ok. aladdin\'s cave continues to provide tantalizing clues. the levels of metals and the levels of organics suggest strongly the presence of something there. the clues strongly suggest there\'s a reason to put a caisson in that area. we don\'t see what we hope to see, that being a man-made object. but a collapse would hide what could have been on the floor. i don\'t know when we\'re going to get back to it, but it is certainly on the list. 	CoOI S11E10.6
i don\'t know when we\'re going to get back to it, but it is certainly on the list. i think everybody in this room still believes that there\'s a very intriguing, compelling mystery here. and that is a good thing. all right, i think we\'re done here for today. good job, gentlemen. thank you very much. let\'s go. fair enough. at the end of another week on oak island, rick, marty, craig and their team are facing the most daunting challenges they have ever encountered in their quest to solve a 229 year old mystery. however, the clues and evidence of hidden valuables that they continue to unearth all across the island suggest that the answers they seek are well worth the pursuit. 	CoOI S11E10.6
morning. should say good morning, right? we\'re gonna find something today, right? well, we\'re pretty excited on this area. the closer we get to the stone road, the more exciting it\'s gonna get. as a new morning dawns on oak island for brothers rick and marty lagina and their team. the quest for answers to a 229 year old treasure mystery continues in one of the most intriguing and inhospitable locations on these 140 acres, the triangle-shaped swamp. gary, you\'re up. all right, mate, i\'m ready to get stuck in. hopefully it\'s not literally. this looks old. that does, yeah. yeah. 	CoOI S11E11.1
all right, mate, i\'m ready to get stuck in. hopefully it\'s not literally. this looks old. that does, yeah. yeah. one week ago, while excavating the potentially 500-year-old stone road or ship\'s warf that was first uncovered in the southeast corner of the swamp  back in 2020, the team found a large hand-wrought chain and hook, which according to blacksmithing expert carmen leigh, was not only used to lift heavy cargo, but may also date back to the 16th century. i\'ll start down there to bottom and work my way back. okay. now the team is digging further into the southern shore that borders the swamp in the hopes of uncovering more of the stone road. 	CoOI S11E11.1
is digging further into the southern shore that borders the swamp in the hopes of uncovering more of the stone road. and also clues that could prove whether or not the swamp was artificially created in order to hide something of great value on oak island. stick there, mate? in the side of the hole? yeah. there, there. zach\'s cut. oh, yeah. that\'s worth banging. ok, i\'ll put it in the bag. ok. this is almost peaty, though. yeah, it does. it\'s a little bit of peat, and then it goes to a mud. and it\'s the only layer in here that\'s kind of like that. 	CoOI S11E11.1
and it\'s the only layer in here that\'s kind of like that. what it tells me is we need to know what\'s under this dirt. right. dr. spooner come down. yeah. all of a sudden, it attacks. yeah. the x-cut wood is interesting because it represents older type of wood construct. and this material is coming up in the peat. it\'s quite layered there. there\'s sand, peat, sand, peat. i would say that it\'s not natural. so what is going on here? hey, billy. hi. we don\'t know what to make of the possible connection between here and the stone road. 	CoOI S11E11.1
hey, billy. hi. we don\'t know what to make of the possible connection between here and the stone road. what do you make of peat, greaseproof sand? it\'s kind of... yeah, the peat shouldn\'t be over the sand. if this beach is moving landward with time, then the sand should be over the peat. i mean, this is, to me, really important because it tells us this feature extended out this way. so why doesn\'t that feature the way it exists there in front of our eyes, why doesn\'t that extend here? i think it was beach. they pulled the boat up on the beach, but you can\'t just have a big 26 foot boat sitting on a beach. 	CoOI S11E11.1
pulled the boat up on the beach, but you can\'t just have a big 26 foot boat sitting on a beach. you\'re trying to unload it. they needed a platform to haul it on. so i think they placed peaks over the sand and that\'s what it looks like to me. could dr. spooner be correct that the swamp and surrounding area was artificially manipulated in order to construct the stone road for the purpose of moving something of great value from a ship onto oak island. i think you need to go three, four feet. so i think we should go back. 	CoOI S11E11.1
i think you need to go three, four feet. so i think we should go back. yeah, yeah, okay. good. i think so. thank you. i hope there is something below here. i hope so, too. as the investigation of the stone road continues in the swamp. regina and craig tester arrive in the money pit area to meet with roger fortin of dumas contracting limited. these are the guys that are going to help us get these voids filled in the shaft itself. along with ryan hooker and clint molino of minova global, a company that specializes in large underground construction operations. 	CoOI S11E11.1
along with ryan hooker and clint molino of minova global, a company that specializes in large underground construction operations. we got to get down to that 95 plus feet. and this is going to allow us to do it, you\'re pretty sure, right? absolutely. once we get this geofoam in place, i\'m very confident that we\'re going to get down there. okay. at least now we can see where the water is coming from. for the past four weeks, the 18th century, 87-foot deep structure known as the garden shaft has been continuously flooded after a number of voids formed just outside of the remodeled feature. 	CoOI S11E11.1
known as the garden shaft has been continuously flooded after a number of voids formed just outside of the remodeled feature. this has made rick, marty and craig wonder if the cause is related to one of the legendary man-made flood tunnels. because it has stopped them and dumas from extending the shaft down to a target depth of 95 feet, where a 7 foot high tunnel has been discovered. a tunnel which runs directly toward an area known as the baby blob. where numerous groundwater tests have yielded high-trace evidence of gold, silver, and other metals between depths of 80 and 120 feet. 	CoOI S11E11.1
where numerous groundwater tests have yielded high-trace evidence of gold, silver, and other metals between depths of 80 and 120 feet. okay, tell us what we\'re gonna do. well, we\'re gonna pump some foam in there and try to get your void filled up. all right, well this is just a pump, right? yep. ryan and clint will use an industrial-grade material known as geofoam, which is specifically designed... for use in mining and construction projects. once injected into the open cavities, it will expand to fill those voids, seal out the inflow of water, and stabilize the garden shaft so that dumas can extend it down into the possible treasure tunnel. 	CoOI S11E11.1
the inflow of water, and stabilize the garden shaft so that dumas can extend it down into the possible treasure tunnel. all right. well, gentlemen, good luck. we\'ll let you get to your work. pleasure to meet you guys. all right. thanks, guys. as the process begins in the garden shaft, just 60 feet to the southwest. so where are we? we are down 88 feet below grade. awesome. geologist terry matheson, oak island historian, charles markhouse, and alex lagina are supervising a new core drilling operation in a borehole known as k-6 a borehole that might actually be on track to encounter another potential cache of buried valuables some 180 feet deep near a site. 	CoOI S11E11.1
that might actually be on track to encounter another potential cache of buried valuables some 180 feet deep near a site. that the team previously investigated six years ago. okay, so k-6 drilling for the muon low density anomaly. exactly. also could be where the h-8 plug ended up. that\'s right. we\'re only about seven or eight feet away from the actual h-8 caisson, which makes it doubly interesting. so what we\'re seeing is a high density anomaly southwest of the garden shaft. it\'s significant. several weeks ago, representatives from ideon technology, utilizing a process known as muon tomography, presented the team with a subsurface scan of the money pit area that revealed numerous low density targets such as voids and possible buried containers. 	CoOI S11E11.1
a subsurface scan of the money pit area that revealed numerous low density targets such as voids and possible buried containers. one of the most compelling was identified at a depth of nearly 180 feet. come on baby, make home. it was in the same area where in 2017, the team excavated with a five-foot diameter steel caisson known as h-8 while they were attempting to locate the fabled chapel vault, a seven-foot high chest reportedly encountered by frederick blair and william chapel during a drilling operation in 1897 that uncovered trace evidence of gold, along bearing the letters, vi. after rick, marty, craig and the team discovered their own pieces of parchment and leather bookbinding in h-8 they were stunned when the caisson encountered a large object at a depth of 170 feet. 	CoOI S11E11.1
and leather bookbinding in h-8 they were stunned when the caisson encountered a large object at a depth of 170 feet. however, as the team extended the caisson deeper in the hopes of penetrating the object, the plot... or spoils inside of the caisson fell from the bottom and pushed the mysterious object deeper and somewhere off to the side. is it possible that the muon target that was detected at that same depth might be a void that now contains the missing plug from aj as well as the fabled chapel vault? i had a cobble there. at least they got, i think they got the cobble. 	CoOI S11E11.1
i had a cobble there. at least they got, i think they got the cobble. that\'s gonna be the 118. 118. we just pushed a rock for 20 feet. yeah, you can see him there, i believe. that\'s a core barrel blocker for sure. how often do we hit cobble around 100 feet? uh, i would say not very often. i\'m just wondering, the flood tunnel\'s description is uncribbed, stacked rocks, right? yeah. that\'s exactly the size of a rock you\'d put in a flood tunnel. well, that\'s interesting. yeah, very interesting. coming up. we are right at the end of the stone road mate, this should be good. 	CoOI S11E11.1
exactly the size of a rock you put in a flood tunnel. in my head it could be tunnel or something, right? yeah, you raise a pretty good point. in the money pit area, while drilling borehole k-6 where something of great value is potentially buried at a depth of approximately 170 feet, alex lagina and members of the team may have just made an important discovery at a depth of just 118 feet. i think it would at least be worth recording on this one, say, on your log. okay. just make a mark saying we hit a cobble at 118. 	CoOI S11E11.2
okay. just make a mark saying we hit a cobble at 118. okay. sure. because i\'m just wondering if maybe there\'s a pattern there. yeah. and that\'s actually an interesting premise. maybe we should look into that. yeah. as we\'re drilling, i\'m thinking... the stories of the flood tunnels are that they\'re full of stones, so we wouldn\'t have an open cavity if it was a flood tunnel. maybe we\'re actually pushing the topmost cobble through the flood tunnel, through the bottom. in 1897, the same year that frederick blair and his team encountered the so-called chapel vault, they also reported discovering a man-made flood tunnel, which halted their efforts at a depth of 111 feet. 	CoOI S11E11.2
so-called chapel vault, they also reported discovering a man-made flood tunnel, which halted their efforts at a depth of 111 feet. it was described as measuring nearly three feet wide by four feet high and was packed with large cobblestones. is it possible that the team has now also found evidence of a flood tunnel? if so, could that mean that they are on target to encounter what it was designed to protect? the flood tunnels were said to be full of stones, small stones, about the size of what we\'re seeing in the drill bit. the breaks don\'t seem to be very fresh or new. 	CoOI S11E11.2
the breaks don\'t seem to be very fresh or new. it could be evidence of deposit or activity. so this is all very, very interesting ground. we\'re going to cover it today. the most important thing is the move on target at depth. yeah, i agree. yeah. as operations continue in the money pit area on lot 5, located on the western side of the island. hey, laird. archaeological team, i\'m checking up on you. marty lagina joins lead archaeologist laird niven, jack begley, and other members of the team as they continue their investigation of a mysterious stone foundation. so what is this? 	CoOI S11E11.2
so what is this? any more insight? this is definitely something going on. the soil is darker, it\'s looser, we\'ve got larger artifacts in it. here it\'s tighter packed, i feel like they\'ve been locked on a lot more. okay. the oak island team has discovered evidence on lot 5 that suggests that a number of secretive operations took place in this area long ago. for instance, near the middle of the lot, they have found a rectangular feature which helen sheldon believes was purposely buried, containing pottery and other artifacts, suggesting that it may date back to the same time period as the early 18th century garden shaft in the money pit area. 	CoOI S11E11.2
it may date back to the same time period as the early 18th century garden shaft in the money pit area. and near the shoreline, they are also investigating this circular depression that not only sits above a much larger foundation, but which has produced artifacts that have been dated to between the 14th and 18th centuries. okay, is there anything i can do for you, larry? yep. over here. what you got? where jack and fiona are. we need the rocks to go, including that big rock, if possible. and then we\'re expanding to the west, so we need half of the circle, those rocks taken out as well. 	CoOI S11E11.2
and then we\'re expanding to the west, so we need half of the circle, those rocks taken out as well. okay, i\'m gonna get the back of it. started as a circular depression is turning into a rectangular feature. the archaeologists themselves are quite amazed at what they\'re finding. let me nudge that one, jack. we\'ve always been looking for some sort of encampment. this is clearly very important. oh, that\'s got it, yeah. the investigation of the mysterious structure proceeds on lot 5. we are right at the end of the stone road, mate. this should be good. i know the archaeologists found a lot of pottery, but hardly any metals. 	CoOI S11E11.2
this should be good. i know the archaeologists found a lot of pottery, but hardly any metals. they\'re going to be here. ok. along the southern edge of the swamp, rick lagina, gary drake and billy gerhardt continue their efforts to uncover another section of the possibly 500 year old stone road. and hopefully valuable clues. i think that\'s the end of the road right there. because there\'s stacked rocks, right? that\'s what i would say. if that\'s the end of the road, though, then if you\'re transitioning from one form of transportation to another, this is where the stuff should be. 	CoOI S11E11.2
the road, though, then if you\'re transitioning from one form of transportation to another, this is where the stuff should be. yeah, exactly. i\'m going to go check that pile. signal right in the corner so that would have come out of that last screw. right rick dig that sucker up it\'s going to be an artifact. let it come from the road right? yep. i\'ll try pinpointing it and then grabbing it out of it. oh tiny whatever it is. and that bothered as long as it\'s old. let\'s see what we got. come on baby, be something good. i think it\'s that. 	CoOI S11E11.2
let\'s see what we got. come on baby, be something good. i think it\'s that. it is this. that is a lot of noise. for what looks like some kind of tack. that looks like it\'s either round or triangular shank. some kind of small fastener. i think it\'s too long for boots and too thin to be an ox shoe nail or an ore shoe nail, yet to be determined. that is definitely a candidate for the xrf machine. now you get... ah, it\'s gotta be something more than that. yeah, into the bag it goes. we\'ll get more. yeah. 	CoOI S11E11.2
gary drake and billy gerhardt have just unearthed several potentially important clues. oh, that\'s gorgeous. look at that. hopefully it\'s got some decoration, mate. if it\'s gonna be anywhere, it\'d be on that base. here\'s another one. ooh, that\'s a big chunk of pottery, isn\'t it? mm-hmm. some kind of bowl or dish. there\'s so much of it. maybe more. we should hand-dig this now. talk about finding something in situ as the archaeologists say. gorgeous, do you see any marks on any pieces? no, yeah, nope. look at that. what have you got, randall? look at that. that\'s nice. yeah, that\'s gorgeous. 	CoOI S11E11.3
no, yeah, nope. look at that. what have you got, randall? look at that. that\'s nice. yeah, that\'s gorgeous. look at that. someone would have had money. i tell you, mike, wherever there\'s milk, there\'s money. this is great. but the archaeologists can put that together and clean it up. maybe there\'s a maker\'s mark. yeah. if rick\'s hope that this pottery, which was found near the potentially 500-year-old stone road, might bear a maker\'s mark, proves to be true. could it help verify the revelations the team made two years ago and nearly 3,000 miles away? it should be just up here. 	CoOI S11E11.3
it should be just up here. in 2022, while visiting alcadao da serra in portugal, a town known to have been a stronghold for the portuguese sect of the knights templar between the 12th and 16th centuries. look at how beautifully constructed. rough and raw, but look at the curvature. look at the degree of slope remains constant. it\'s beautiful. rick, his nephews, alex and peter, as well as doug kroll, were shown a stone road that was nearly identical to the stone road in the swamp. if there is a portuguese connection to the construction of the road in the swamp, maybe this is the blueprint. 	CoOI S11E11.3
if there is a portuguese connection to the construction of the road in the swamp, maybe this is the blueprint. okay, now we gotta really keep our eyes peeled, right? could rick, gary, and billy? have just gotten one step closer to proving whether or not that potential connection is true. there\'s pottery there, greg. oh yeah, no mistake in that. what is it, rick? the thin stuff, i think. yeah, it\'s the thin stuff, and this looks like it\'s a plate. that\'s a plate rim by the look of it. it\'s gotta be some makers max on some of this stuff. 	CoOI S11E11.3
that\'s a plate rim by the look of it. it\'s gotta be some makers max on some of this stuff. good eye, mate. check this out. oh, it\'s coming up. look at that. that\'s a beautiful piece of pottery. that could be old. yeah, this could be old, mate. that is really, really fancy. almost like a leaf design on it. i haven\'t seen that before, so that makes it interesting. here you go. another one. excellent work. oh, man, that\'s sweet, isn\'t it? mm-hmm. yet glazed on one side. it\'s got a bit... this is lovely, mate. good eye. that\'s some sweet pottery. 	CoOI S11E11.3
mm-hmm. yet glazed on one side. it\'s got a bit... this is lovely, mate. good eye. that\'s some sweet pottery. and i believe that this pottery is older than that dish or a bowl we found. yep, i agree. i think the pottery\'s getting older, the deeper we\'re going. yep. we found a number of different types of pottery. one or two vessels where they could possibly be reconstructed. and it was quite localized. nice finds, rick. but what does that say? perhaps laird can make sense of it. i know we\'re running out of daylight, mate, but we\'ve got to come back and dig some more, because there really could be anything anywhere in this sand. 	CoOI S11E11.3
mate, but we\'ve got to come back and dig some more, because there really could be anything anywhere in this sand. well, then what you need to do is ask billy if we want to keep digging. guess what his answer is going to be. yeah. hell yeah. yeah. following morning. i don\'t think we have to go any deeper do you? take that little square out of there. as rick leads the efforts in the swamp. so it is expanding and filling that void up. that\'s great. that\'s what we want to see. absolutely. and while the geofoam application proceeds in the garden shaft. 	CoOI S11E11.3
that\'s great. that\'s what we want to see. absolutely. and while the geofoam application proceeds in the garden shaft. oh there she goes. there she goes. hey charles, terry. hey, how you doing alex? i hear we\'re close to target depth. we are. yeah. alex lagina returns to the money pit area. lovely. to check on the core drilling operation in borehole k-6 a borehole which the team hopes will encounter man-made workings or valuables between the depths of 170 and 180 feet. they haven\'t brought anything up for quite a while. we\'ve got to cross our fingers to still be it. 	CoOI S11E11.3
board at 183. all right, so let\'s see what we got. it is a potentially important moment in the money pit area for members of the oak island team. here we go. we\'re looking for something that slipped out of the h-8 case on. that could be it right there. after encountering a void in borehole k-6 at a depth of 183 feet, where a highly specialized muon tomography scan identified possible man-made workings earlier this year. thank you, mike. no prob. let\'s carve this bad boy out and see what we got here, gentlemen. they are examining a freshly unearthed core sample that will hopefully reveal clues as to what the void contains. 	CoOI S11E11.4
they are examining a freshly unearthed core sample that will hopefully reveal clues as to what the void contains. so we have 10 feet of real bedded material. for the most part, it seems relatively natural and normal. except here, right under the bedrock. yeah. potentially is low density material there. and it looks like it might be disturbed. if the plug slipped out of h-8 settled anywhere, it\'s going to be mixed up like this. absolutely. i think we have the potential to have a portion or an aspect of the h-8 plug. yeah. chances are we just may be close to the chopper valve. 	CoOI S11E11.4
yeah. chances are we just may be close to the chopper valve. so we\'re close, i guess, is the optimistic take. yeah. h-8 was a very interesting case on it. that\'s a case on where a 12-foot plug just dropped overnight and went somewhere down into a void. so if we can locate where that plug is, it could indicate that we\'re near the chapel vault. possible evidence of the spoils or plug that the team believes may have pushed the chapel vault to a deeper location in the money pit area if they have found the missing plug from h-8 in this mysterious void is it possible that they are close to locating the fabled chapel vault as well? 	CoOI S11E11.4
from h-8 in this mysterious void is it possible that they are close to locating the fabled chapel vault as well? we find it just in under the lip of the actual large bedrock overhang. so it\'s possible the depositors were able to work to this point and get in under there. possibly this was an open area. that\'s right. but k-6 183 to 187 looks good. could answer a lot of questions for us. yeah. so we might be close to finding something. we should let rick know. sounds good. so gentlemen, the k-6 hole was meant to find and determine the idea of an anomaly. 	CoOI S11E11.4
sounds good. so gentlemen, the k-6 hole was meant to find and determine the idea of an anomaly. alex, terry, and charles meet with rick lagina and other members of the team in the war room to report their potentially important discovery that was made in borehole k-6. what did the hole do? do you think we hit the anomaly? i think it\'s important to show where it is in relation to h-8 can you plot the k-6 can we see it up on the screen? k-6 is right there. i definitely think we hit some loose material and i\'m probably disturbed at about one. 	CoOI S11E11.4
k-6 is right there. i definitely think we hit some loose material and i\'m probably disturbed at about one. 83 to 187 and 188. given that low density anomaly seems to jump with the levels at which we lost the plug to the h-8 caisson. i really think that we had a piece of that plug from h-8 and so the void that terry\'s talking about, so i brought up the data from ideon, our borehole k-6 would have gone through here. this is the anomaly they\'re talking about. you\'re not wrong. the h-8 caisson would have gone through and this potentially could be the area where we lost the plug. 	CoOI S11E11.4
the h-8 caisson would have gone through and this potentially could be the area where we lost the plug. i think the idea on low-density anomaly is potentially the void that encapsulates the chapel vault. you agree? yeah. exactly. in my mind, that\'s where the treasure of the money pit that was never recovered has been slowly falling deeper and deeper. k-6 drilling has significantly upped the ante, if you will, in terms of the interest in this area. it\'s eminently possible that the chapel vault fell to a greater depth into areas that have been not explored or investigated. so this could lead to possible treasure recovery or something of great importance. 	CoOI S11E11.4
so this could lead to possible treasure recovery or something of great importance. well, bottom line is there\'s potential for case on work. everyone should weigh in on. where the drill program goes. agreed. if the question is where do we drill, i\'d want to put one more four hole through that h-8 plug. yeah. i don\'t see how you\'re gonna walk away from it. okay. if the team is able to discover more definitive evidence of man-made workings or valuables in the area around borehole k-6 and h-8 they could, as they have done in the past, install a much larger diameter steel caisson in order to retrieve it. 	CoOI S11E11.4
they could, as they have done in the past, install a much larger diameter steel caisson in order to retrieve it. over the next coming days, we\'ll reposition and try to hit the anomaly in the void. that\'d be great. a lot of work to do. let\'s go. that afternoon. lindy, helen, moja. hello. how\'s it going? so, this looks like the dig has expanded yet again since the last time i was here. yes. alex lagina joins helen sheldon and other members of the archaeology team on lot 5 as they continue their investigation of the mysterious stone foundation. are you still getting artifacts? 	CoOI S11E11.4
are you still getting artifacts? we got a really interesting one. it\'s called a strikalite. it\'s a piece of european flint that they would have used to hit on the metal to make a spark to start a fire. see all those bits that have chipped off it? yeah, right here. this is how you identify it, this kind of worn edge. yeah, there were quite a few worn bits on it. how do you know it\'s european? just by the color. and they used to bring it over to north america as a ballast on ships, and it\'s unusual to find them. 	CoOI S11E11.4
and they used to bring it over to north america as a ballast on ships, and it\'s unusual to find them. a piece of flint? a possible european origin? and discovered in the foundation that was buried beneath the circular structure on lot 5? is it possible that it was left here by someone who secretly inhabited this area long ago? if so, might there be more clues in the future that will help the team better understand how it could be related to the oak island mystery? alright, well thank you for the update and then i\'ll stick around and make myself useful. 	CoOI S11E11.4
what do you think of these? oh, my heavens. on lot 5, located on the western side of oak island. it\'s copper, i think. yeah, definitely copper, because of the greenness of it all. alex lagina has just made what could be an important discovery in the spoils that have been excavated from the mysterious stone foundation. i would say decorative rather than functional just because of the fragility of it. it\'s not the first copper we found on the island like this. peter and david. a few years ago found copper sheeting on the high side of the beach. very cool. 	CoOI S11E11.5
peter and david. a few years ago found copper sheeting on the high side of the beach. very cool. two years ago. wow. this is fantastic. while investigating the shoreline of nearby lot 4, old piece of copper and gary drayton, along with brothers peter and david fernetti, found a very similar artifact. an artifact that blacksmithing expert carmen lake believed. might be one of the most significant clues ever found by the team. so, being used like on a box? were there certain boxes that would consistently have that type of sheeting on it? only for valuables. treasure. right. it\'s very old. 	CoOI S11E11.5
only for valuables. treasure. right. it\'s very old. when you say very old, how old do you mean? oh, this could go all the way back to 1100s. wow, it\'s pretty old. is it possible? that alex has just found evidence of an ancient container designed to hold something of value in the mysterious foundation on lot 5. if so, what happened to the contents? and could they be buried deeper within this feature or perhaps somewhere deep in the money pit area? i think this is gonna be a good candidate for the lab here. right. we should put it all carefully together so it doesn\'t get. 	CoOI S11E11.5
right. we should put it all carefully together so it doesn\'t get. crushed by anything else. okay, i\'ll do that. okay, great. thanks. that afternoon. scoop full of opportunities. oh look at that piece of lumber. yeah, saw that. in the swamp, gary drake, jack begley and billy gerard continue unearthing new potential clues just to the south of the possibly 500 year old stone road or ships wharf. what is it jack? it\'s an old cut piece of wood. there we go. could be a roller, something that was used on top of the stone roadway, and you\'d roll cargo up on it? 	CoOI S11E11.5
could be a roller, something that was used on top of the stone roadway, and you\'d roll cargo up on it? sure, and it\'s in the right area right by the road, right? we got wedges, rollers, and the chain hoist to pull, right? yep. could gary and billy be correct that this cut wooden log might have been used along with a large chain that was found one week ago in this area? and which carmen legge believed was designed to lift heavy cargo in order to transport something of great value along the stone road long ago. so we\'ll set it aside and get it tested. 	CoOI S11E11.5
so we\'ll set it aside and get it tested. okay, mike. if so, could that suggest the clues that the team has found in the swamp and on lot 5 have revealed more evidence that there could be multiple treasures buried in the money pit area? ooh, i see wood. ooh, look at this. that looks like a bit of decking or a bit of planking. oh, you might be right. it\'s dimensional. yeah, and i\'m saying that it could be a piece of decking or planking, but it could be a bit of railing. i like how you keep thinking ship, because definitely there\'s ship pieces in here. 	CoOI S11E11.5
i like how you keep thinking ship, because definitely there\'s ship pieces in here. to me, the most important recover is. we\'ve got out of this dig is the wood, because we can have the wood c-14 you can see it\'s been worked, and i\'m open that when this is tested, we get those same ancient date ranges. that would be fantastic. all right, well, keep an eye out for more wood. i\'ll keep an eye out, mate. and i\'ll go put it up with the other wood we found. thanks, mate. good find, gary. all right, so back to the search. 	CoOI S11E11.5
while excavating the earthen barrier between the oak island swamp and the waters of mahone bay, billy gerhardt, jack begley, and gary drayton have just uncovered another compelling find. could that be a piece of the wall that fred nolan found? i think that\'s it. yeah, i mean, if we found the wall in the swamp, that\'d be a major discovery. yeah, rick would be as happy as a pig in the proverbial. yeah. fred nolan\'s wall? after partially draining the swamp in 1969, the late oak island landowner, fred nolan, reportedly discovered evidence of what he believed to be timbered walls or dams buried along both the northern and southern borders of the swamp. 	CoOI S11E11.6
of what he believed to be timbered walls or dams buried along both the northern and southern borders of the swamp.  this led fred to theorize that the entire feature had been artificially created centuries ago in order to hide something of great value. that looks like two pieces of wood and they\'ve been cooked to fit like that. there\'s definitely two pieces there. right. is it possible the oak island team has found corroborating evidence that fred\'s theory was true? i think this is the wall. mm-hmm. maybe we can wash it down a little bit. all right. but i think we should call rick to come and see. 	CoOI S11E11.6
all right. but i think we should call rick to come and see. yeah, i agree with that, mate. all right. there are so many things connected with oak island that no one has seen for a very long time. fred nolan\'s war is one of them. hey guys. it could be true. i don\'t see a treasure chest. no, but we got news for you. we just wanted to wait for your input before we went any further. that. wow. we were thinking this might be the wall that fred nolan had found. it\'s possible. and those two pieces of wood there looked like it was cooked. 	CoOI S11E11.6
it\'s possible. and those two pieces of wood there looked like it was cooked. and the angles looked like they fit together. does it look broken? or, i mean, i got to go over there. between the two, they certainly looked like demerick cut fitted, but there\'s so many fitting together. yeah. hope you don\'t mind having wet feet. it\'s a big piece of wood, just blow it out about that. like you said, cut angle, cut there. yeah. certainly we have the live edge on the backside if we wanted to see 14 it. mm-hmm. it would be interesting to expose the top of that. 	CoOI S11E11.6
mm-hmm. it would be interesting to expose the top of that. yeah. certainly looks like it could be pretty important. well, yeah, i would dig that to see if it extends. yeah. but i think we need to understand what this may represent and perhaps its association with that. and that\'s exactly why we stood down. i figured this could be important. yeah. we want to understand this in its totality, right? and the only way to do that is be very specific about how we approach exposing it. it\'s all good news. yeah. i so desperately want this to be the wall that fred had stated was there. 	CoOI S11E11.6
it\'s all good news. yeah. i so desperately want this to be the wall that fred had stated was there. so i\'m very hopeful because if you found such a structure in the face of the swamp, i would go on record as saying it had to be closely associated with the original work. there\'s a real story here and we are all endeavoring to come up with an answer and that\'s why we\'re doing the work. okay, well, you know guys, great job. it was a long day in the hot sun. i know, you know, unfortunately every day there\'s an end of the day. 	CoOI S11E11.6
how\'s it going alex? good, good to see you again. nice to see you. so what\'s the update, what\'s going on? well, we\'re finally moving ahead now. good. as a new week begins on oak island, brothers rick and marty lagina and their team have good reason to believe that they are on course to finally solve a 229 year old mystery. we\'ve pretty well dealt with all that water situation we\'re dealing with. it\'s all stabilized, the geofoam is in and it went well. yeah, it was amazing. it was amazing. now we\'ve got full control of the water. good. 	CoOI S11E12.1
yeah, it was amazing. it was amazing. now we\'ve got full control of the water. good. all right, here we go. let\'s do this. five weeks ago, the oak island team\'s efforts to deepen the early 18th century garden shaft down to a target depth of 95 feet were halted when mysterious voids outside of the structure caused it to flood with salt water. this is where our water starts right here and then it comes in along the side. this made the team wonder if they had encountered one of the legendary flood especially since a seven-foot high tunnel was recently discovered just below the garden shaft, which leads toward the baby blob, an area where water testing has revealed high trace evidence of gold and silver between 80 and 120 feet underground. 	CoOI S11E12.1
blob, an area where water testing has revealed high trace evidence of gold and silver between 80 and 120 feet underground. tell us what we\'re gonna do. well, we\'re gonna pump some foam in there and try to get your void filled up. but thankfully, last week, representatives from minova global began applying an industrial compound known as geofoam to fill the voids, stop the flow of water, and to stabilize the shaft. so that duma\'s contracting limited can continue deepening the structure over the course of the next several weeks and finally reach the possible treasure tunnel below. now if we get into this tunnel, and if the tunnel\'s original works... 	CoOI S11E12.1
now if we get into this tunnel, and if the tunnel\'s original works... that it probably leads to something good. so we could be close. we\'re going to geofoam everything nice and tight. and then after that, we\'re going to excavate, install a panel, excavate, install a second panel, excavate. so it\'s basically digging again. i see you got the grab on. exactly. we just started digging. so we\'ll be very close to that 89 foot depth. at 89 feet, we\'re getting close to that 95 foot tunnel, but i\'m really excited to get down to depth and see what\'s down there. 	CoOI S11E12.1
getting close to that 95 foot tunnel, but i\'m really excited to get down to depth and see what\'s down there. oh, absolutely. for sure. the last two, three days have been, you know, upbeat because the guys were finally moving ahead. we\'re getting away from this water. so yeah. perfect. well thank you roger. sounds good man. i want you to get back to it. absolutely. thanks. talk to you later. later that afternoon. continues their work in the garden shaft, nearly 73 feet to the southwest. hey marty, what\'s going on here? so what we\'re doing here marty, this hole is about 5 feet southwest of h-8 marty lagina joins oak island historian charles barkhouse, geologist terry mathison and surveyor steve guptill. 	CoOI S11E12.1
about 5 feet southwest of h-8 marty lagina joins oak island historian charles barkhouse, geologist terry mathison and surveyor steve guptill. as they supervise the drilling of borehole 5.25, 6.25. a borehole that incredibly may be on track to locate a second potential treasure deposit in the money pit area, more than 180 feet underground. the plug that fell out of the hak zone, that could have fallen in this direction. okay. hey mike, what\'s up? i hit the void at 183. alright, so let\'s see what we got. one week ago, while drilling borehole k-6 just 8 feet to the south. 	CoOI S11E12.1
alright, so let\'s see what we got. one week ago, while drilling borehole k-6 just 8 feet to the south. the team penetrated a mysterious void at a depth of 183 feet. it is a potentially critical discovery because the void is adjacent to borja h-8 which the oak island team excavated six years ago with a 50 inch diameter caisson that they believed may have come into contact with the fabled chapel vault, which was first reported by frederick blair and his drill operator, william chapel, in 1897. during the team\'s excavation, at a depth of nearly 180 feet, they attempted to penetrate the possible vault and encountered a large void, which caused the spoils, or plumb, inside of the h-8 caisson to fall out, resulting in the believed vault being pushed deeper and somewhere off to the side. 	CoOI S11E12.1
of the h-8 caisson to fall out, resulting in the believed vault being pushed deeper and somewhere off to the side. how deep are we? 78 feet? we\'ve got two more cores coming, we\'re going to take a look at those now. the team\'s hope that with this new borehole they can further explore the void they discovered last week and hopefully locate the long-lost chapel vault. there\'s the top of the next run. 80 feet. okay let\'s cover up guys. excuse me, steve-o. sorry, jerry. no problem. okay, there\'s the top. so at some point... so we get some wood here. 	CoOI S11E12.1
sorry, jerry. no problem. okay, there\'s the top. so at some point... so we get some wood here. charles, where do you think the wood came from? it possibly could be the chapel shaft. that\'s interesting. it could be skimming along the outside edge. the chapel shaft. in 1931, melbourne chapel, along with his father william and frederick blair constructed a 12 foot by 14 foot shaft down to a depth of 163 feet in order to locate the vault. unfortunately, they were unsuccessful. but if the oak island team is correct that they have found the outer edge of the chapel shaft, could that offer an important clue that they are in the general area where the vault is located? 	CoOI S11E12.1
the chapel shaft, could that offer an important clue that they are in the general area where the vault is located? okay. oh! what the hell have you got there? big chunk of steel. oh my, what the heck? it came out of the top of this sample right here. yeah, really? really? couldn\'t this be old time drill pipe? because we know they drilled in these holes and we know they used skinny pipe. no question. i think so, it\'s heavy enough. that could be the drill that found the famous chapel vaults. that could be it, right? they used this skinny little drill. 	CoOI S11E12.1
that could be it, right? they used this skinny little drill. back in the 1890\'s they did. if we found something meaningful here, just below the chapel shaft, we could put down another caisson. if we see something worth getting, we will get to it. well done you guys. follow that pipe on down, we\'ll find the chapel vault. all right. go get it. while the operations continue in the money pit area. it\'s time to get to work. along the southern border of the triangle-shaped swamp, metal detection expert gary drayton, jack begley, and billy gerhard continue looking for important clues near a potentially 500-year-old stone road or ship\'s wharf. 	CoOI S11E12.1
gary drayton, jack begley, and billy gerhard continue looking for important clues near a potentially 500-year-old stone road or ship\'s wharf. what is the battle plot, mate? are we going deep in here or are you taking this section out? we\'ll try to go along the edge where the... log was... we are ready for some artifacts, mate. okay, me too. in recent weeks, the team has made a number of compelling new discoveries in this area, including new sections of the stone road, an ancient chain and hook that may have been used to lift heavy cargo, and evidence of a wooden wall, which the late fred nolan believed may have been used to artificially create the swamp hundreds of years ago. 	CoOI S11E12.1
wooden wall, which the late fred nolan believed may have been used to artificially create the swamp hundreds of years ago. what\'s that? look at that there. it\'s a rock in it. no, it\'s a little piece of wood. yeah. i thought it was a rock when i looked at it. look at the notch in that. yeah. that was pretty deep, billy. yeah, no, well, i mean, you see, we\'re below the bottom of the swamp, right? you know, the bottom of the swamp is up there where the road is, right? yeah. so is this a naturally filled beach, or was it filled by humans? 	CoOI S11E12.1
don\'t see a treasure chest. try it, mate. we\'re trying. we have found some strange pieces of wood. let me go grab them. after being alerted to a compelling discovery near the stone road in the southeast corner of the oak island swamp, so this piece came up when we were digging along the muck inside, rick lagina arrives to personally inspect it. yeah, look, that\'s doweled. if you hold it like that. see how that was gone down. if i were to suggest that this is anything like what we found before, i think that it\'s something like the u-shaped structure. 	CoOI S11E12.2
were to suggest that this is anything like what we found before, i think that it\'s something like the u-shaped structure. in 2018, rick, marty and the team unearthed a mysterious 65-foot-long wooden construct at smith\'s cove known as the u-shaped structure. you got a roman numeral? yeah, if it is, it\'s a seven, v-one-one. first discovered by dan blankenship in the 1970s and believed to be associated with a flood tunnel that feeds sea water into the money pit area. the u-shaped structure. featured strange roman numerals and hand carved wooden dowels. similar sized dowel like the u-shaped structure they were in at an angle. 	CoOI S11E12.2
similar sized dowel like the u-shaped structure they were in at an angle. and thus this part is meant to hold it in place. is it possible that the team has found evidence beneath the stone road in the swamp that suggests it may have been built by the same people who created the u-shaped structure and perhaps the money pit itself? the good thing is if we decide this is an older edge and that\'s where the best c-14 dates are. yeah, but clearly shaped wood that was thrown underneath this stone path. and that\'s why we gotta keep digging. 	CoOI S11E12.2
yeah, but clearly shaped wood that was thrown underneath this stone path. and that\'s why we gotta keep digging. yep. yep. let\'s find some more. let\'s find some more. as rick, jack, gary and billy continue searching in the swamp on lot 5, located on the western side of the island. hey, good. how\'s it going out here? good. alex lagina joins jamie cooper, fiona steele, and lindy martin as they carefully investigate a mysterious circular stone feature and a much larger rectangular foundation that was recently unearthed below it. so what\'s new? how\'s it coming? so what we\'re doing now, we\'ve expanded the unit over, we\'re finding artifacts all the way through the film. 	CoOI S11E12.2
so what we\'re doing now, we\'ve expanded the unit over, we\'re finding artifacts all the way through the film. okay. one year ago, rick, marty, craig tester, and the team have made a number of discoveries in this feature that suggest it may have been a staging ground for whoever might have buried treasure in the money pit. these finds include a 500-year-old venetian glass bead, a 14th century lead barter token that may be connected to the lead cross unearthed at smith\'s cove in 2017, and several metal tools. that had been scientifically matched to the homestead of sir william phips the 17th century english privateer from maine, who some believe buried a vast cache of spanish treasure on oak island back in 1687. 	CoOI S11E12.2
century english privateer from maine, who some believe buried a vast cache of spanish treasure on oak island back in 1687. so one of the things that we now realize is that this sort of linear feature that we were looking at isn\'t actually a wall that was there, but we\'re seeing hard rocks that are going past it. okay. so this structure may be... quite a bit bigger than we ever gave it credit for. right, but whatever was happening here, the bigger it gets, the bigger the operation, right? yeah, yeah. the overall size of the dimensions speak to more people being involved than just say a single family. 	CoOI S11E12.2
yeah, yeah. the overall size of the dimensions speak to more people being involved than just say a single family. right. so we\'ve got kind of an operation happening here that we know nothing about. yes, exactly. it could be exactly what we\'re looking for. hopefully, yeah, we\'ve got some more work to do. okay, well, i\'ll start sifting. perfect, thank you. i\'ll grab buckets. perfect. while the archeologists carefully remove the soils from the foundation, alex will sift the collected materials for any clues and hopefully valuables. this is kind of something different. oh my goodness. look how flat it is. 	CoOI S11E12.2
this is kind of something different. oh my goodness. look how flat it is. yeah. look, you can see almost three rivets on it. yeah. so maybe the top of a trunk. decorative for sure. is that a dalek piece? yeah, just, we find a lot of iron, but we don\'t often find a lot of the flatter pieces and that one looks, you know, kind of decorative. mm-hmm. oh yeah, i see that\'s the rivet right there maybe. yeah. that\'s just something a little bit more decorative. it hints to something else, you know? looks like something you might find on a trunk. 	CoOI S11E12.2
it hints to something else, you know? looks like something you might find on a trunk. yeah. if it is off a chest, it would be rugged. it would be a big one. yeah. a decorative iron artifact? potentially from a trunk or chest? if so, what did it contain? and could it be related to the trace evidence of precious metals that have been detected in the money pit area? well, whatever this is, we have the equipment in the lab that we can take a scan of this and basically see through all the crust on it and hopefully get a better idea of what it is. 	CoOI S11E12.2
of this and basically see through all the crust on it and hopefully get a better idea of what it is. let\'s bag it up. results of that. that\'s great. as the investigation proceeds on block five. what have you found, ray? i\'ve found some wood chips. rick lagina, along with jack bentley, billy gerhardt, and gary drayton continue making potentially important discoveries in the southern region of the swamp. look at this. here\'s a big timber. there\'s some other bigger pieces of wood over here. it\'s underneath the cobblestone road or this edge. excellent. might be some fasteners in it. 	CoOI S11E12.2
it\'s underneath the cobblestone road or this edge. excellent. might be some fasteners in it. correct. yeah. i think it\'s the edge of the road. yeah. i think what we have to do though is push these back and then take this roll of rock out of here to get to the top of that wood. be able to have a good look. stylistically, you make sure some type of construction technique. right. construct there built by humans. if you can definitively say that that construct was a manipulation of the swamp to some agenda, boy that\'d be huge. you know, it makes you think what else might they have hidden in the bog? 	CoOI S11E12.2
at the southern border of the oak island swamp, marty lagina and craig tester join rick lagina and other members of the team to inspect the wooden structure that was just unearthed beneath the stone road. that\'s the edge. really? you believe it ended right there? yeah. there was two logs underneath the edge of the rope, but it looked really like they were fitted together, like you took one log and, you know. like if you were building a cabin, like that kind of thing. there was brush just like under the construct itself and smaller logs so it\'s going to underpin the road. 	CoOI S11E12.3
there was brush just like under the construct itself and smaller logs so it\'s going to underpin the road. and that has stopped abruptly. really? yeah, yeah. swamp muck mixed with bigger logs on the bottom that were running perpendicular to the road. but it was also well enough into the structure of the stones that you can say it was put down during the construction of the road. yeah, i got it, yeah. okay. there\'s big timbers underneath the stone road, which just underscores that that was a massive undertaking. somebody put that road in for a specific reason, and i think they wanted it to not be found after they were done. 	CoOI S11E12.3
that road in for a specific reason, and i think they wanted it to not be found after they were done. it could be leading us back to where the treasure is. and then just before we got to the end of the road here, i mean, we have pulled up some really, really nice artifacts, old-looking chains. some really interesting chains. i haven\'t seen this chain, i heard about this chain. very unusual. this looks old. two weeks ago, while excavating the southern edge of the potentially 500-year-old stone road, the oak island team uncovered a large hand-wrought chain and hook, which blacksmithing expert carmen lay dated to the 16th century. 	CoOI S11E12.3
the oak island team uncovered a large hand-wrought chain and hook, which blacksmithing expert carmen lay dated to the 16th century. is it possible that this artifact was once used in the swamp area to offload cargo from a ship onto oak island? the chain was a three point hitch. and forged by the look of it. might have even been a four point hitch. to me, you could stay there on a nice stable surface, hook a box or something very heavy three point hitch. and unload out here. because if you\'re pulling with a three point hitch, you can pull it across this heavy ground and then get it to the bog and pull it right up that road. 	CoOI S11E12.3
can pull it across this heavy ground and then get it to the bog and pull it right up that road. if you\'re trying to fit the chain to the road. to me that\'s an explanation. it really is. i think it\'s an important discovery. we have clearly defined the extent of the construct of the road and where it transitions to the beach. does it align with the idea that a larger ship offshore, a tender comes, brings the material to a crafted slipway or a wharf or dock? sure, it fits perfectly. great. very interesting all the stuff you have. 	CoOI S11E12.3
sure, it fits perfectly. great. very interesting all the stuff you have. hopefully they can tell part of the story. hopefully it ties together to give us a date and hopefully we find something even better yet. yeah. what\'s next here? what are you gonna do next? we\'re only beginning to get to that point. oh you\'re gonna keep digging underneath where billy is? yeah. okay well the best dig is yet to come. yeah. let\'s get it done. yep thank you for the update. pretty cool. as the dig for clues continues in the that\'s 118. 118. thank you, colton. 	CoOI S11E12.3
pretty cool. as the dig for clues continues in the that\'s 118. 118. thank you, colton. and while the core drilling operation in borehole 9.25, 6.25 proceeds in the money pit area. hey, how\'s she going? carmen. welcome to the new and improved lab. all right, yeah, let\'s do it. alex lagina, charles barkhouse, and argumentallurgist emma culligan meet with blacksmithing expert carmen leigh in the newly constructed oak island laboratory. so we have finds that were made on lot 5 for you today. oh, ok. they are eager to hear carmen\'s assessment of the copper and iron artifacts that were recently discovered within the large foundation beneath the circular stone feature. 	CoOI S11E12.3
carmen\'s assessment of the copper and iron artifacts that were recently discovered within the large foundation beneath the circular stone feature. i think we should start with this copper. i actually pulled this out of the sifting box. i\'d love to know what your opinion is. ok. i see that the other pieces are very thin. except for this one here seems to be a little thicker. yeah. that is bigger, it looks like it. it is, yeah. and it\'s rounded. i also tapered as well. it does look like a bit of a pattern on the end there. it has to be something decorative. 	CoOI S11E12.3
i\'m wondering if that could be a jewelry thing? like a small jewelry chest or something? yeah, it is very possible. in the oak island laboratory, blacksmithing expert carmen lake has just confirmed that a number of copper pieces found one week ago on lot 5 may have been used to decorate a small chest designed for carrying valuables. what about these iron pieces? i don\'t know, have a look. it\'s all very thin, like off of a strap. so it\'s not for a barrel or a small round container. there\'s a strap to secure a box. a heavily banded and heavily fortified box. 	CoOI S11E12.4
there\'s a strap to secure a box. a heavily banded and heavily fortified box. what would be the purpose of that? cash box, maybe? play box, yeah. that would be very interesting. i have to get a ct scan on that one. very good. earlier this morning. emma analyzed the iron artifact using two scanning devices. the first, known as the skyscan 1273 ct scanner, emits non-destructive x-ray radiation that penetrates corrosion on artifacts, producing high definition, three dimensional images of them. the second, known as an x-ray fluorescent spectrometer or xrf device. can identify the type of metal an artifact is composed of. 	CoOI S11E12.4
can identify the type of metal an artifact is composed of. so does it look like there\'s two pieces joined? it does. there\'s two materials. so i did do an xr point scan on that material as well. and it was lead. oh. yeah. oh, okay. and then the rest of the body is iron. my puzzling thing is why is the lead in the iron as well? it is a... common thing to find within old english iron, is that some lead content, which fits 1600s, early 1700s. the dating on the artifact could fit really well with the theory surrounding sir william phips who was a privateer, and we have a theorist who has placed phips in this region, potentially with a ship full of illicit silver, in need of a place to hide it. 	CoOI S11E12.4
placed phips in this region, potentially with a ship full of illicit silver, in need of a place to hide it. we know that phips found silver on the concepcion, according to the theory. of 32nd degree freemason scott clark. in the fall of 1687, the english privateer, sir william phips conspired with a high-ranking freemason from nova scotia named andrew belcher to bury spanish treasure they had salvaged from the shipwreck known as the concepcion on oak island. it\'s intriguing, especially given that the feature on lot 5 appears to have been covered over. yeah. is it possible that the team has found more evidence in the feature on lot 5, proving that this theory could be true? 	CoOI S11E12.4
possible that the team has found more evidence in the feature on lot 5, proving that this theory could be true? we could be looking at a small but strongly constructive box. which means it could have been part of any treasure that was here. that\'s right. thank you, carmen. very good. see you later. as the team concludes their meeting with blacksmithing expert carmen lay, and while the investigation in the triangle-shaped swamp continues. all right, let\'s see what we get up here. mike\'s gonna give us some material right now. other members of the team anxiously supervise the core drilling operation in borehole 9.25, 6.25. 	CoOI S11E12.4
other members of the team anxiously supervise the core drilling operation in borehole 9.25, 6.25. here comes the anaconda. as they have now reached the target depth of some 180 feet, where they hope to encounter a void and evidence of the fabled chapel vault. what\'s the bottom? the bottom\'s 190. 190, ok. that\'s about right. we\'ve got slush and loose material. that\'d be representative of the void. almost no recovery here. yep. this is the biggest stretch where we have nothing other than slush. there\'s our void. okay. look at this. there\'s some wood fibers. fragments of wood found in the void more than 180 feet underground in the money pit area? 	CoOI S11E12.4
fragments of wood found in the void more than 180 feet underground in the money pit area? is it possible? that they could be related to the large object that was pushed aside by the nearby a.j. kason six years ago. and we might see the plug, the h-8 plug. we may hit a chunk of the plug. and the boys will push on. if the team has found the missing plug from h-8 and potentially the vault in this borehole, then the next core will hopefully reveal the proof. hey guys. charles, welcome back. yeah, well, where are we and what did you find? 	CoOI S11E12.4
hey guys. charles, welcome back. yeah, well, where are we and what did you find? an apparent void. oh, really? i mean, it\'s really quite exciting. here it comes. class cord. you finished up where, mike? two-ten. very good. this is one of the most important targets in the money pit. because if we can find the lost plug from h-8 it might help us find the treasure. so we\'re really excited about this. what you got, terry? unfortunately, it\'s not void. we\'re well into bedrock. that\'s it. well, we don\'t like to see that, but there it is. after several moments of great anticipation. 	CoOI S11E12.4
that\'s it. well, we don\'t like to see that, but there it is. after several moments of great anticipation. it appears that the legendary chapel vault remains elusive. however, is it possible that it still lies within this void, perhaps within just feet of the team\'s current position? oak island never ceases to surprise us. i think we should call it a day, charles. we\'re gonna go through the buckets today. yeah, we are. meanwhile, nearly half a mile to the west on lot 5, alex lagina. assists the archaeology team as they search for valuable clues inside the stone foundation. 	CoOI S11E12.4
assists the archaeology team as they search for valuable clues inside the stone foundation. oh my god! i think it\'s a bead. it looks similar to the one we had last time i believe. really? oh, that\'s gorgeous. right? oh, wow, yeah, look at that. that is exactly the same pattern from the original bead that we found. that\'s probably venetian. that\'s just incredible to find two beads from the same piece of jewelry. yeah. amazing. another possible venetian glass bead found in the buried stone foundation? given that this type of italian jewelry, which could date to as early as the 15th century, was used not only for fine adornments, but also as a form of currency, is it possible that they may be related to the fragments of the decorative container that was also recently discovered in this feature? 	CoOI S11E12.4
possible that they may be related to the fragments of the decorative container that was also recently discovered in this feature? so we\'ve got two of these now. yeah. if so, what else might the team find as they continue to dig? okay. i will go find you some more. perfect, thank you. nice job, boy. yes. the bead in combination with the decorative iron piece that we thought might have gone on a chest, that is starting to say maybe somebody left a chest of valuables here. to me, that\'s exciting. what do you got? what did you find? catching on swimming. 	CoOI S11E12.4
oh, look at that. what do you got? a coin maybe? what? a coin? it\'s got a coin? yeah. what? cool. hahaha. while sifting through spoils from the mysterious stone foundation on lot 5 of oak island. yeah, i think that is a coin. really? yep. oh wow. hahaha. archaeologist lindy martin has just made a potentially... valuable discovery. that\'s copper for sure. it like almost tapers on the edges instead of being flat like modern coins. yeah i don\'t see a milled edge. it\'s rounded. rounded exactly. it\'s not perfectly regular which would say older i think. it could be very old. 	CoOI S11E12.5
it\'s rounded. rounded exactly. it\'s not perfectly regular which would say older i think. it could be very old. a copper coin and without a milled or ridged edge? during the late 17th century in england, the famed scholar, sir isaac newton, who was also the master of the royal mint, implemented coin designs with milled edges in order to combat the counterfeiting of currency. you know, that really attests to the importance of screening too, you know. that\'s an amazing find, that\'s really cool. is it possible that this coin, bearing no milled edges, could date back prior to the 17th century, or perhaps? 	CoOI S11E12.5
is it possible that this coin, bearing no milled edges, could date back prior to the 17th century, or perhaps? even earlier, if so, could it help the team identify who originally created this mysterious stone structure? can you see anything on it? well, there is something down here at the bottom. and i think the ct scan will show at least some details on the front of him. but i think there\'s going to be a little bit of a pattern that maybe we can identify. good find, lindy. thanks. nice job. thank you. well done. both of the shifters today so far are doing our best. 	CoOI S11E12.5
thanks. nice job. thank you. well done. both of the shifters today so far are doing our best. absolutely. yeah, you guys are doing great. the lucky shifters, i guess. nice job, everybody. all right. let\'s find some more. as operations continue in the garden shaft, as well as on lot 5, back in the southeastern region of the swamp, marty lagina, metal detection expert gary drayton and billy gerhardt continue searching for another breakthrough discovery near the potentially 500-year-old. stone road. no metal it\'s... oh, i don\'t think there\'s any metals. all right, let\'s get ready for the next load. 	CoOI S11E12.5
no metal it\'s... oh, i don\'t think there\'s any metals. all right, let\'s get ready for the next load. thanks for this one mate. very very good. come on. let\'s go find some treasure. there\'s nothing in here, this is quiet. what we got here? it looks like a bit of the barrel stave. maybe. similar to those barrel staves we found digging in the swamp there. yeah. it looks like a barrel stave, gary, because it\'s wider here than it is there. yeah. i don\'t know what\'s going on here. probably where it ripped out, but yeah. i\'d say that\'s a bit of a barrel. 	CoOI S11E12.5
probably where it ripped out, but yeah. i\'d say that\'s a bit of a barrel. yeah. well, one thing for sure, we\'ve got enough of those barrel staves that were recovered not too far away. we can compare it. that\'s right. well... we\'re trying to see whether the idea that this is an offloading area is correct or not. a barrel certainly would fit with that. yeah. that\'s how they transported stuff. a barrel stave? found near the stone road or ships wharf? could gary be correct? that it might be related to the pieces of wooden cargo barrels that were unearthed in this area three years ago, at which carmen lake believed could be as much as 600 years old. 	CoOI S11E12.5
were unearthed in this area three years ago, at which carmen lake believed could be as much as 600 years old. every time we dig in and around the swamp, we find something. the stone road, the paved area, the ramp, lots of artifacts. so we\'re going to continue digging. we\'ll do a little analysis on that, but i\'m wanting to find more stuff. oh, yeah, some coins. put it right over there. thank you. sure. what the hell\'s going on? is catching on something. i wonder if it\'s wood or rocks. there\'s a boulder. i don\'t know if that means that\'s the end of the road. 	CoOI S11E12.5
there\'s a boulder. i don\'t know if that means that\'s the end of the road. i don\'t know, we want to do a little shovel work to check that. that\'s up to you. gary, i\'ll go have a look. yeah. go have a look, gary. let\'s go have a look. check it out. where\'s the boulder? to your left. oh, right here. yeah. and that\'s the first one. so what you\'re suggesting is there could be a row here? well, if just from my angle, it could be in alignment with the stone road. yeah. what do you think in here? 	CoOI S11E12.5
it looks similar to the rocks on the stone roadway. yeah, that easily could be the road extension. it is a moment of great excitement for marty lagina, gary drayton and billy gerhardt. that\'s another big rock next to it. yeah. as they may have just discovered another section of the potentially 500-year-old stone road, or shipswarm, in the southeast corner of the oak island swamp. another big rock next to that big rock. what do you think? those are the first two big rocks we\'ll have to dig a little further. so you\'re thinking these are like retaining rocks? yeah, it would only be the retaining edge i would say for sure. 	CoOI S11E12.6
yeah, it would only be the retaining edge i would say for sure. i don\'t think it\'s possible to stand and look at that stone road and not think that this had to have a special purpose. it\'s a rather massive construction and it had to be done for a reason. what was it for? i\'m prepared to just see what the data suggests as we dig more. that could lead us directly to what we\'ve been seeking for years. well, what i would say, billy, is just as you\'re going this way, look for others. hm. kind of scrape along. 	CoOI S11E12.6
hm. kind of scrape along. all right. i\'m gonna go start that pump, gary. yep. i\'m sorry. one thing that\'s really exciting about being in the swamp is that possibility that billy sticks that bucket in. and next thing you know, you come up with some really great old artifacts. three interesting pieces of wood. barrel staves. got two strips. and then this looks like a handle. yeah. rounded edges. it\'s a peculiar piece of wood. yeah. i wonder if it\'s like an old pickaxe handle. could be. or an axe. it almost looks hand-shaped. a hand-shaped tool? could it have been used in the original construction of the stone road? 	CoOI S11E12.6
it almost looks hand-shaped. a hand-shaped tool? could it have been used in the original construction of the stone road? if so, is it possible that scientific analysis might help identify not only its age, but also who brought it to oak island? okay, let\'s get back to work. yep. there\'s another rock there. there\'s more bigger rocks coming this way. in the line? yeah. okay, bailey, we\'ll go have a look. this was the original rock, yeah? there, yeah. then there was buried, then there\'s another one there. there\'s a pretty steady row right to, and then there\'s a flat one lower behind you, gary. 	CoOI S11E12.6
there\'s a pretty steady row right to, and then there\'s a flat one lower behind you, gary. see the- there\'s one here, one there, one there. yeah, but what\'s that mean? maybe some buried in between. i think there are clues in the swamp. clearly there are. i have been absolutely wrong about the extent of- the workings in the swamp. i thought there was nothing there. there\'s a lot there. some good stuff in there, i\'m sure. now, marty was never a big fan of the swamp, but the more discoveries we have found in the swamp over the years, the more i see the twinkle in marty\'s eye. 	CoOI S11E12.6
the more discoveries we have found in the swamp over the years, the more i see the twinkle in marty\'s eye. i think he\'s beginning to like the swamp. you know, we may want to take that over a little bit. i don\'t know if that means that\'s the end of the road. you know, we thought it might\'ve been the log, but the log was an edge. well, let\'s see, you know rick\'s coming a little bit, let\'s see what he wants to do. i think we should have the rest of the guys look at it. this could be very important. 	CoOI S11E12.6
i think we should have the rest of the guys look at it. this could be very important. yeah. then i\'ll kick it around with rick and craig and we\'ll decide what to do. i\'m telling you, mate, we are on to something here. for rick, marty, craig and the team, the 229-year-old oak island mystery becomes more complex by the day. but as they keep digging... thrilling and applying disciplined science to the discoveries being made all across these 140 acres. one thing appears to be certain. oak island has kept an incredible secret for hundreds of years. at now, it is perhaps just a matter of time until the laginas and their team unearth the truth behind it. 	CoOI S11E12.6
s11e13.1 hey, gentlemen. money and time are getting more precious. absolutely. time especially. as a new day begins on oak island for brothers rick and marty lagina and members of their team. mother nature and some other things got us in the garden shaft. they have gathered in the war room to discuss the most ambitious and challenging operations that they are conducting in the hopes of solving a 229-year-old mystery. the excavation and drilling programs in the fabled money pit area. after much deliberation, rick and i, craig, with input from a lot of you actually, we have decided that we don\'t feel we have the requisite targets for canisters at this time, for case ones. 	CoOI S11E13.1
actually, we have decided that we don\'t feel we have the requisite targets for canisters at this time, for case ones. so we\'re going to just put it off till next year as far as the canisters go. we thought there would be targets out there that we could say, ok, we need a can here, we need a can here, we need a can here. and unfortunately, we don\'t have that at this point. it\'s a timing issue. we can\'t get the garden shop done in the time it would take for a case on work on additional targets. so we\'re not going to put cans down. 	CoOI S11E13.1
so we\'re not going to put cans down. are they pumping right now? they\'re pumping it out at the same time? yeah, that\'s what they\'re doing right now. they\'re lowering the pump, and we\'re going to see where the sediment\'s at. it was rick, marty, and craig\'s hope that by now representatives from dumas contracting limited would have been able to complete the reconstruction and extension of the mid-18th century garden shed down to a target depth of 95 feet. where it is expected to breach a 7-foot-high tunnel. a tunnel that leads directly west into the so-called baby blob, where water testing in previously drilled boreholes has identified a massive source of gold, silver, and other metals between 80 and 120 feet underground. 	CoOI S11E13.1
in previously drilled boreholes has identified a massive source of gold, silver, and other metals between 80 and 120 feet underground. this is where our water starts, right here, and then it comes in along the side. however, several weeks ago, after saltwater began flowing into the garden shaft at a depth of nearly 67 feet, dumas has been working tirelessly to seal any leaks and stabilize the structure. and now, even though they are finally able to continue the efforts to reach the potential treasure tunnel below the shaft, the workspace that dumas requires to safely operate in the money pit area will prevent rick, marty, craig, and the team from conducting what they hoped would be a second major operation this year. 	CoOI S11E13.1
will prevent rick, marty, craig, and the team from conducting what they hoped would be a second major operation this year. the installation of several 10-foot diameter steel caissons at other locations in the money pit area where evidence of not only man-made workings but also precious metals have been recovered between depths of 150 and 180 feet underground. so then what are we going to do in the money pit instead? well, to address everyone\'s concerns, what are we going to do? currently, the sonic rig is still there. there\'s a lot of unique opportunities left to come up with high-value targets. 	CoOI S11E13.1
currently, the sonic rig is still there. there\'s a lot of unique opportunities left to come up with high-value targets. yeah. so, we\'re going to get more data. we will continue with the vertical drilling with a sonic rig, which will allow us to be most efficient when we finally do mobilize the oscillator next year. yep. and don\'t forget guys, the garden shaft isn\'t finished. there\'s still a lot of work to do there yet. they\'re going to come down on this tunnel. when they get close, we\'re going to start drilling. and then as they come down through that, we\'re going to see how this tunnel lies. 	CoOI S11E13.1
and then as they come down through that, we\'re going to see how this tunnel lies. we\'re going to see how it was built. we\'re going to see where it goes. that tunnel is going in the direction of where precious metals are coming from, which is very exciting to me. dumas suggested it could get 40 feet out. well, you\'re talking 80 foot diameter. from an informational perspective, it is literally a big dig. yeah. as dumas continues extending the garden shaft to a total depth of 95 feet, where they hope to breach a mysterious tunnel. in the coming days, once they have reached a depth of 90 feet, they will use a lateral probe drilling device capable of reaching up to 40 feet outside of the garden shaft. 	CoOI S11E13.1
feet, they will use a lateral probe drilling device capable of reaching up to 40 feet outside of the garden shaft. this will allow the team to not only collect samples of the tunnel in order to determine just who may have built it, but also, hopefully, pinpoint the source of all the precious metals that have been detected in the area. i know that there\'s been some setbacks, but when i look around the war room table and i look in the eyes of the guys, i don\'t see any sense of being done. i see enthusiasm. i see some really smart people all focused on a singular agenda, trying to solve the mystery. 	CoOI S11E13.1
i see enthusiasm. i see some really smart people all focused on a singular agenda, trying to solve the mystery. so i know we\'re making progress. you know, there\'s every reason to believe that as we move out in the year, that we are really going to use this opportunity and turn it into a positive. yeah. okay, let\'s get back to the things we can do. yep, agreed. later that afternoon, as the team from dumas contracting limited continues the extension of the garden shaft in the money pit area. all right, in fact, time. oops-a. god, i love this place. 	CoOI S11E13.1
all right, in fact, time. oops-a. god, i love this place. rick lagina and craig tester join metal detection expert gary drayton and billy gerhardt near the southern edge of the triangle-shaped swamp. got that stone roadway. we\'re close to shore. imagine how many people landed on this beach back in the day, came ashore. oh, look at that. kind of looks similar to the rocks on the stone roadway. yeah. one week ago, while excavating near the massive cobblestone road in the southeast corner of the swamp, marty lagina, billy and gary uncovered yet another possible section of the mysterious construct. 	CoOI S11E13.1
in the southeast corner of the swamp, marty lagina, billy and gary uncovered yet another possible section of the mysterious construct. this is a type of road that was built in europe in the 1500s. since the team\'s discovery of the stone road in 2020, experts such as historian terry devone have speculated that it could be as much as 500 years old. the stone path looks exactly like this. and incredibly, in 2021, while visiting alcado de serra, portugal, a location that served as a stronghold for the portuguese sect of the knights templar from the 12th to the 16th centuries, rick and members of the team were shown a nearly identical feature. 	CoOI S11E13.1
knights templar from the 12th to the 16th centuries, rick and members of the team were shown a nearly identical feature. the bottom there is different, way more rockier and bigger rocks. guess we gotta dig, right? yeah, gotta dig. yep. craig, there\'s a rock here. and there\'s one in the ground here. and there\'s one here. and there\'s one here. four in a row? four or five there at least, yeah. and it\'s all very uniform. rocks don\'t end up in a straight line like that normally. yeah. hey, rick. anything to see? we got down deeper here we started hitting rocks everywhere so to me it almost looks like it\'s an extension part of the stone road or work material but it\'s definitely way, way more rocks than there should naturally be here. 	CoOI S11E13.1
s11e13.2 like a ramp and elevation wise it just seems to be a continual slope coming on down with this this would be definitely the lowest part it\'s probably went right onto the beach well definitely different it\'s a tough one could be an extension could be in the southeast corner of the oak island swamp, rick lagina and members of the team have just discovered a possible ramp feature connected to the stone road. we\'re not going to pull this out right now. i think we want to continue looking that way, because he hasn\'t gone deeper there. that\'s basically it. 	CoOI S11E13.2
i think we want to continue looking that way, because he hasn\'t gone deeper there. that\'s basically it. and if it\'s continually going lower, then it could be right there. if the team has actually found a ramp connecting the stone road to the shoreline, could it represent more evidence that the road, or ship\'s wharf, was constructed in order to move heavy cargo from a large ship  onto oak island? craig felt there were some rocks that one could suggest that there were a little mini wharf. why don\'t you go ahead and metal detect this? and it certainly does look like that. 	CoOI S11E13.2
why don\'t you go ahead and metal detect this? and it certainly does look like that. could a small boat pull up to it? sure. and my hope is that as we excavate, we\'ll come to a greater understanding of what the stone represents. no, no metals in there. why is it there? why was it built? who built it? we have that construct, but we have no explanation for it. well, you should dig over here and then we can clean this area up and then have a go at looking at this area in its entirety? yeah, i like that idea. 	CoOI S11E13.2
yeah, i like that idea. okay. let\'s get after it. as the investigation in the swamp continues. h.i. 6175. here we go. this is a little bit to the north and west of the actual h.a. caisson. yeah. in the money pit area, geologist terry matheson and oak island historian paul trautman are overseeing the drilling of a new borehole known as hi 6.75. a borehole nearly two feet from h-8 one of the team\'s additional targets of interest located more than 50 feet southwest of the garden shaft. thank you. the h-8 case arm intersected possibly in the chapel vault. 	CoOI S11E13.2
thank you. the h-8 case arm intersected possibly in the chapel vault. this hole will hopefully cover that ground. we could recover that. there\'d be a lot of artifacts. this could be the original location. in 2017, after recovering pieces of parchment and leather bookbinding in a six-inch borehole known as h-8 the oak island team excavated a five-foot diameter steel caisson in the hopes of encountering the legendary chapel vault, a large wooden chest that was reportedly drilled into by frederick player and william chapel in 1897, and which was believed to contain both gold and parchment documents. we have a 14-foot plug right now, but we\'re stuck. 	CoOI S11E13.2
we have a 14-foot plug right now, but we\'re stuck. incredibly, the oak island team\'s caisson struck a large object at a depth of 170 feet. something was in front of the can and we were pushing it for a while until it hit something hard. but unfortunately, as they extended the caisson deeper in the hopes of breaching the potential vault, it was pushed deeper and into a void somewhere off to the side. i\'m glad that we\'re getting it done. we\'re going to 171. yeah, that\'s right. if the team is able to not only penetrate the mysterious void, but also locate the fabled chapel vault, once the garden shaft project is complete, they will be able to excavate a 10-foot diameter caisson and hopefully retrieve it. 	CoOI S11E13.2
once the garden shaft project is complete, they will be able to excavate a 10-foot diameter caisson and hopefully retrieve it. hopefully, we can get a few more answers with this borehole, but right now, we\'re well above target horizon. we\'re on 28 feet below grade. hi 6.75 is going to build up a lot of secrets. yes. as the core drilling operation continues in the money pit area. hey. hey, how\'s it going? at the oak island interpretive center. rick lagina and his nephew alex are meeting with gary drayton, archaeologist laird niven, and archaeometallurgist emma culligan. all of this is coming from inside that circular depression. 	CoOI S11E13.2
all of this is coming from inside that circular depression. they are eager to receive gary, laird, and emma\'s analysis of a coin as well as a potentially 500-year-old phoenician bead that were both found one week ago in a large stone foundation located near the shoreline on lot 5. let\'s have a look, mate. it\'s the right size for a penny or a half penny. oh yeah, no mistaking that. king george? well, let\'s take a look, emma. earlier today, emma scanned the coin with the skyscan 1273 ct scanner, which emits non-destructive x-ray radiation to penetrate corrosion and reveal the object\'s finer details. 	CoOI S11E13.2
coin with the skyscan 1273 ct scanner, which emits non-destructive x-ray radiation to penetrate corrosion and reveal the object\'s finer details. oh, there you go. okay. right there, i see on the right-hand side. oh, yeah. it should say george\'s three wrecks. wrecks, okay. yeah, it\'s latin children. yeah, that\'s definitely. so 1760 to 1820. yeah. i think it\'s the first edition head. yeah, an early head. yeah. so that takes us into 1770s. an english penny or half penny that could date back nearly three decades prior to the discovery of the money pit in 1795? if so, who left it in the foundation on lot 5? 	CoOI S11E13.2
if so, who left it in the foundation on lot 5? someone who may have left something of value behind? or was it someone looking for the fabled treasure? we think we\'re still in the foundation, and this just came from the fill that\'s actually really close to the top of it. yeah. it\'s also in the stuff that was thrown onto this feature. it means whatever\'s underneath it is older. older, yeah. the money pit was supposed to have been discovered in 1795, and that\'s why these 1760s dates that we\'re getting off the coin and the other artifacts make lot 5 so fascinating. 	CoOI S11E13.2
and that\'s why these 1760s dates that we\'re getting off the coin and the other artifacts make lot 5 so fascinating. if this feature was covered over, it may have been associated with whatever did happen in the money pit prior to its discovery. so in our world, that means maybe this lot 5 feature is associated with early depositor activity. you were here for this as well. yeah. this was exciting too. it\'s a blast bead. oh, wow. yeah. it is colored. this is a stretched bead. you know they have... different colors of enamel laid in and then they\'d stretch it for like 150 feet and then just cut off the beads. 	CoOI S11E13.2
colors of enamel laid in and then they\'d stretch it for like 150 feet and then just cut off the beads. so it\'s probably off a bracelet or a necklace? yeah, most likely from venice. wow. in 1470 ad, a specialized method for the production of fine glass bead jewelry was developed in venice, italy. as demand quickly grew, venetian glass beads also became a highly valued type of barter currency along trade routes in europe, india, africa, and the new world. interestingly, we did find another one earlier on. this one\'s even smaller. is it possible that if the team has actually found two venetian glass beads in the mysterious foundation on lot 5, could there be even more valuable artifacts waiting to be recovered deeper below? 	CoOI S11E13.2
beads in the mysterious foundation on lot 5, could there be even more valuable artifacts waiting to be recovered deeper below? yeah, so very, very similar, which means there\'s probably a lot of them out there. yeah. yeah. if this was truly valuable, maybe this and the other things we\'re finding could be a trade item, could be just in a chest of valuables that was taken from somebody. we need to find an expert because feeds are an extremely complex subject. and that\'s why we need someone who\'s been doing it for years and years and years. that little item there might be highly significant. 	CoOI S11E13.2
coming down. copy that. and while operations to deepen the garden shaft continue in the money pit area. in treasure. okay, here we go. all it takes is one good find. that\'s right. rick lagina, gary dre and billy gerhardt continue searching for valuable clues near the potentially 500 year old stone road in the southeast corner of the swamp. alright. i saw that. look. oh, i see it, mate. that\'s nice. oh, i see the place you call it. that\'s gorgeous, mate. oh, look at that. and there\'s another piece here as well. where? there. you see the rim? yep, yep. 	CoOI S11E13.3
oh, look at that. and there\'s another piece here as well. where? there. you see the rim? yep, yep. all right, let\'s see if this is a match. oh, that is absolutely stunning. that\'s beautiful, mate. what is that? that\'s old. that is some fine china by the look of it. i mean, this is iron stuff. i know that this chinese porcelain was really, really popular. that\'s what the portuguese fleets used to bring up through these trade routes. really, really nice. potentially ancient chinese pottery? if so, could gary drayton be correct that it may offer another portuguese connection? 	CoOI S11E13.3
potentially ancient chinese pottery? if so, could gary drayton be correct that it may offer another portuguese connection? to the stone road in the oak island swamp. according to documented history, beginning in the early 16th century, portuguese explorers, including vasco da gama, who is also a member of the portuguese sect of the knights templar, made extensive trading expeditions to china, bringing back, among other goods, fine chinese porcelain, which then became highly traded throughout the region and the americas. well, you look, you see the age on the back. you see that crackling on the back? mm-hmm. it\'s been in there a while. 	CoOI S11E13.3
you see that crackling on the back? mm-hmm. it\'s been in there a while. what we\'re looking for is to try to establish a connection between these artifacts and the actual physical constructs. stone road, stone path. it\'s possible this pottery will give us great insight into what this feature represents, because that stone road, to me, is still inexplicable. there\'s something right there. something? you seen it? yep. ooh, big chunk. that\'s a big chunk too. yeah, that\'s a big chunk. okay, mate, got it in me hand, mate. i\'ll wait till we get out. here\'s another one, gary. here\'s another one. 	CoOI S11E13.3
i\'ll wait till we get out. here\'s another one, gary. here\'s another one. here\'s another one? yep. that is so fantastic. i think this may be something different. is it? yeah, i think this is teacup. don\'t get any better than that, mate. what a perfect start to the morning. let\'s see, look at that. it\'s not a teacup or a bowl. oh yeah, actually, it\'s two different vessels. where\'s the silver spoon? so with it, right? that would be nice. i bet there\'s more in here. yep. oh, here we go, here we go. oh, look at that, billy. yeah. 	CoOI S11E13.3
i bet there\'s more in here. yep. oh, here we go, here we go. oh, look at that, billy. yeah. i love this blue glaze. oh, yeah, that\'s a chinese design on it as well. turned into the swamp tea party, isn\'t it? if you found all that pottery, it should be a pretty good chance to find them something else there, too, right? yeah. with that amount of finds, i think we have to go through it by hand. agreed, mate, and i\'ll put these to one side because i\'m turning into gary potter. wow, rick. and billy continue searching for clues in the swamp. 	CoOI S11E13.3
wow, rick. and billy continue searching for clues in the swamp. back in the money pit area. let\'s get ready for another core, here it comes. one eighteen. thank you, colton. other members of the team continue monitoring the core drilling operation in borehole hi 6.75. a borehole where they hope to recover evidence of the fabled chapel vault. nearly 180 feet below ground. wow, that doesn\'t look good. little bit of pvc. yeah. you know what that means, my friend. it means we\'re drifting. yeah, that means we\'re not going straight down. yeah, unfortunately, the drill drifts off. it looks like we tagged into either h7 or maybe h6.5 that\'s in this area. 	CoOI S11E13.3
it looks like we tagged into either h7 or maybe h6.5 that\'s in this area. and so we\'re going down and getting that pvc. unfortunately, the drill pipe has veered off course and apparently encountered another nearby borehole that was previously drilled by the team. very difficult to drill a straight hole. sometimes these holes wander an average five or six feet. and if the borehole walks a little bit and gets into one of those other ones, it\'s almost impossible to get it out. so we\'re going to move the rig. if we\'re still in the right area or heading for the right area, then we can keep going. 	CoOI S11E13.3
if we\'re still in the right area or heading for the right area, then we can keep going. it\'s discouraging the idea that we\'re passing through an old borehole. yes. that\'s not good. we don\'t want to keep chewing on this all the way down. that\'s right. yeah. we got to get them a new spot. i agree. while terry and paul re-grew in the money pit area. i\'m really excited to see what this guy has to say. yeah, i think this is the place, jack. jack begley and oak island historian, charles barkhouse, have traveled some 50 miles northeast to halifax, nova scotia. 	CoOI S11E13.3
jack begley and oak island historian, charles barkhouse, have traveled some 50 miles northeast to halifax, nova scotia. i think it\'s back here, jack. hey, how you doing? good, how are you? not too bad. here, they are meeting with philip doucet, a specialist in glass bead design at his studio in order to have him examine the believed venetian beads that were recently found on lot 5. so we were working on oak island and we\'ve uncovered this buried feature and while digging amongst the boulders, our archeologists found these beads. they believe that they could be venetian beads. very nice. 	CoOI S11E13.3
they believe that they could be venetian beads. very nice. and they\'ve come out of the grounds, and they were there for a while. the signs of the pitting that you can see on the ends. well, i know exactly what these appear to be. these are drawn glass beads. and what really identifies these as drawn is that the stripes are incredibly straight. and that comes from pulling. against the glass. it pulls them out straight. oh, yeah. these beads, i\'m very confident were made in venice. this color, the red and the blue and the white are very early formulations of glass in that color. 	CoOI S11E13.3
were made between 1500 and 1650. really? in halifax, nova scotia, these are very old. glass bead expert philip doucet has just confirmed that the two beads that were recently unearthed in the stone foundation on lot 5 are phoenician trade beads and date as far back as the early 16th century. the date range for these beads, you\'re extremely confident that it falls into that timeframe. that\'s correct. drawn glass, white, striped. they were a precious commodity. wow. if there was a really brisk trade going on, five or six of these beads would buy a beaver pelt. really? and that\'s a high value item. 	CoOI S11E13.4
really? and that\'s a high value item. and a bracelet would probably have 40, 50 beads on it. oh. that\'s a small fortune in trade. okay. and it was a great currency for the people that were coming across the atlantic, in particular in nova scotia. it was first the portuguese, and then the spanish, and then the french took over, and the british taking over louisburg. the portuguese were a major trader up and down the american coast, and then the canadian coast at that time. and they would have these barrels of beads that they would trade. which come originally from venice. 	CoOI S11E13.4
and they would have these barrels of beads that they would trade. which come originally from venice. we have found some things that pointed to the portuguese possibly being on the island. there\'s even questions on the stone road along the swamp. there are theories that that stone road was built by the portuguese based upon the dates. we\'ve wondered if the portuguese could be involved and they had made it to oak island, but maybe they were over on lot 5 as well and these beads got lost. is it possible that these venetian beads which may be 500 years old or older, could offer evidence that the feature on lot 5 was built during that same time period. 	CoOI S11E13.4
500 years old or older, could offer evidence that the feature on lot 5 was built during that same time period. if so, could it also have been constructed by those who created the stone road in the triangle-shaped swamp, and perhaps explain the high-trace evidence of precious metals that had been detected all across the money pit area? if the portuguese were here, these beads could be an indication that they were around the lot 5 area. they might be the depositors of the treasure in the money pit. we don\'t know, but this could be what answers it all. 	CoOI S11E13.4
we don\'t know, but this could be what answers it all. here, let me give these back to you. keep them safe. this makes them be more important. yeah, absolutely. lot 5 has become a very prominent point on the island. and it makes you wonder, what else is there? well, this is really great information. agreed. and i want to thank you for your time. oh, you\'re very welcome while jack and charles begin their return journey back on oak island. this was the most interesting area. why don\'t you just start digging? yep rick lagina along with gary drayton at billy gerard continue their search for additional clues along the stone road or shipswarf in the southeast corner of the swamp on the do. 	CoOI S11E13.4
their search for additional clues along the stone road or shipswarf in the southeast corner of the swamp on the do. did you see something billy? it looked like a piece right away but i\'m not sure. seems to be a lot of peat in this, there could be some pottery. i think that\'s a rock. not sure. no, that\'s a bit of pottery, mate. and it\'s different as well. it\'s got black edges. so it\'s two-tone. it would have been black and brown. or brown and tan. look, see that darker glaze there? oh, yeah. and it\'s on that side. 	CoOI S11E13.4
or brown and tan. look, see that darker glaze there? oh, yeah. and it\'s on that side. yep. i\'ve never seen that before. and i haven\'t, mate. it\'s got the black glaze on both sides. that is different. right. well, put that in the bag, dad, to the collection. i do find the incredible collection of... pottery telling some sort of story and so we need to do our homework. we need to understand what how old this pottery is, what it might have been used for. is there a cultural stylistic understanding of it and then go from there? there we go! 	CoOI S11E13.4
is there a cultural stylistic understanding of it and then go from there? there we go! more pottery mate, look it\'s tumbling out. oh here you go gary, here\'s your favorite. there you go. oh that\'s bloody beautiful, look at that. that is really nice. i think this is older than that other porcelain we found. oh yeah, i mean this is really nice. don\'t, that\'s not the same pattern. that\'s an older person. that\'s different. so there was a lot of people here, spent a lot of time right here at the end of this road. and it might span centuries. 	CoOI S11E13.4
this is absolutely stunning, mate. that is either a shoe or a boot. while searching for clues near the stone road in the southeast corner of the swamp, rick lagina, gary dream, and billy gerhardt have just made a potentially critical discovery. obviously it\'s leather. it looks like the eel piece. i think that is a eel of a boot or a shoe. i\'d say it\'s the heel, yeah. do you see that square hole there, mate? mm-hmm. and that was made by fastening this sole to the shoe with odd nails, little handmade nails that had square shanks. now, if it was modern, it would be glued. 	CoOI S11E13.5
now, if it was modern, it would be glued. so this is an oldie. 1800s or older because now they\'re glued. the sole of a possibly ancient boot found near the stone road in the swamp. but if so, just how old could it be? and who did it belong to? that\'s a very cool find, yeah. if there\'s a certain style to this type of chute, since it\'s close proximity to stone road, you may be able to infer who built the road. i think it\'s important to understand the age of this artifact. i\'m gonna put it in the bag. 	CoOI S11E13.5
i think it\'s important to understand the age of this artifact. i\'m gonna put it in the bag. and the dates on the pottery and see what it tells us about the mystery. i\'ll bring it back to the lab. they can conserve it properly. oh, man, i\'ll let you know if we find any more. perfect. good luck. see ya. see ya, mate. later that afternoon... hey, scott. hey, guys. they\'re just above where the tunnel should be on the west side. rick and marty lagina join operations manager scott barlow in the money pit area. they\'re gonna be on an angle for the first hole. 	CoOI S11E13.5
they\'re gonna be on an angle for the first hole. judging by the looks of the drill setting. after months of tireless work and unforeseen challenges, representatives from dumas contracting limited have successfully extended the garden shaft to a depth of 90 feet and are ready to begin a core drilling operation in the hopes of penetrating the seven foot high tunnel located just five feet deeper below ground, a tunnel which leads directly toward the baby blob. and a potential cache of buried treasure. hopefully they get some wood in their returns. let\'s find a tunnel for that. let\'s find a tunnel. 	CoOI S11E13.5
hopefully they get some wood in their returns. let\'s find a tunnel for that. let\'s find a tunnel. finally, we\'re ready to do the probe drilling down to what we think is the tunnel. what do you got? so we need the data. we need to probe drill first and try and see where this tunnel is and what might be inside it. okay, let\'s just see what happens. start drilling? that\'s enough. i am extremely excited about this because what we find at the bottom of that garden shaft could be everything. the key to this whole mystery might be down there. 	CoOI S11E13.5
the key to this whole mystery might be down there. it\'s possible that that\'s where the treasure is. so i mean, we could find it. what does this tunnel represent? it\'s been the focus of the year, you know, does it represent searcher era or, or presearcher era? so fingers crossed, the hope is there\'s a wood core in there and we\'ll send it off. she may not hear anything until the very bottom, until the 95 foot mark. they\'re about there now. what\'s poppin\'? that\'s poppin\'? yeah, it\'s poppin\' bro. yo, i\'m trying to clean up that whole room so i can see it. 	CoOI S11E13.5
but if it\'s wood, it can only be the tunnel. it is a potentially critical moment in the money pit area for rick and marty lagina and their team. be about the right depth for the floor of the tunnel. after weeks of frustrating setbacks, representatives from duma\'s contracting limited may have finally reached a seven-foot high tunnel located just below the garden jack at a depth of some 95 feet. a tunnel that runs westward towards an area known as the baby blob, where water testing has detected high trace evidence of gold, silver, and other metals between 80 and 120 feet underground. 	CoOI S11E13.6
blob, where water testing has detected high trace evidence of gold, silver, and other metals between 80 and 120 feet underground. the top is balled, but right now we\'ve got seven feet of rock in that hole. well, could be you\'re going through the floor. so that\'s potentially the floor of the tunnel. the floor of the tunnel. hold it up, see what it says. hold it up. i feel like a we\'ll soon know. we\'re about to see what they went through. i mean, sometimes it fails. sometimes you\'ll get a court. but i think we have one. i want to see a good piece of wood. 	CoOI S11E13.6
sometimes you\'ll get a court. but i think we have one. i want to see a good piece of wood. that\'s what i want to see. that means that our efforts are worthwhile. i want to see a good piece of wood. that\'s what i want to see. i\'ll show you when you open it. what\'s going there? there\'s a collective sigh of relief. and it confirmed the existence of the tunnel underneath the garden shaft. bingo. they did it. great relief. and we can send it off for c-14 testing. and keep going to see if that will lead to solving a mystery or refining the treasure. 	CoOI S11E13.6
and keep going to see if that will lead to solving a mystery or refining the treasure. this whole thing is wood, isn\'t it? that\'s clay, wood. a lot of wood. yeah, it\'s got to be six sections, isn\'t it? could we be one step closer to finding a treasure and if in fact the treasure\'s there? yes. i\'ve been focused for three years now on the metals in the water. we had two preeminent scientists saying these metals are coming from somewhere and it\'s probably very near the garden shaft. so we wanna drill another hole or we wanna just get to digging? 	CoOI S11E13.6
so we wanna drill another hole or we wanna just get to digging? i\'d say we drill the north corner, tell you something about the structure of it. zach, it might be a good data point to figure out what it is. it\'s a tunnel to somewhere, it\'s a tunnel for something. it could be original. if that c-14 date comes back, and if it predates search activity, it\'s incredible. if you are looking at a tunnel where people went in to safeguard a secret or treasure, that raises the bar so high, i can\'t even get over it. i mean, look, it\'s been a long summer. 	CoOI S11E13.6
i mean, look, it\'s been a long summer. there\'s been a lot of obstacles, but we\'ve proven there\'s wood down below the garden shaft. we found it, right? that was one of the goals, right? and we\'re this far from, well. we\'re going like this far from getting to the top of that. so let\'s figure out what this thing represents. hey, here\'s the deal. right now, we\'re still in the game. if that come up empty, we\'d start to think game is getting bad. we\'re still in the game, so let\'s move on. for more than two centuries, the inability of searchers to recover something of great value in the money pit has caused many to wonder if the oak island mystery was based on mere fantasy. 	CoOI S11E13.6
s11e14.1 hey, paul. good morning, guys. how\'s it going? well, we\'re hoping for an update. so, uh, we sent a drone a couple holes. good man. as a new day begins on oak island for brothers rick and marty lagina, they arrive in the fabled money pit area to check on the progress of an operation that they hope will finally reveal the answers to a 229-year-old treasure mystery. it\'s getting close. first hole kind of seemed like it was deflecting off a wall. where are we again? it would be the north side. one week ago, after extending the mid-18th century structure known as the garden shaft down to a depth of 90 feet, representatives from dumas contracting limited used a coring drill to penetrate a mysterious tunnel located at a depth of 95 feet. 	CoOI S11E14.1
representatives from dumas contracting limited used a coring drill to penetrate a mysterious tunnel located at a depth of 95 feet. which is believed to run due west toward an area known as the baby blob. it is in this region where water testing that was conducted in previously drilled boreholes has detected high trace evidence of silver, gold, and other metals between 80 and 120 feet underground. there\'s a structure of some sort down there, a wooden structure of some sort, and you\'re about to unearth it, right? that\'s right. okay, that\'s enough said for me. so, today we put in the landing. 	CoOI S11E14.1
that\'s right. okay, that\'s enough said for me. so, today we put in the landing. we\'re adding another set. now, after unsuccessfully drilling into the bleached tunnel for a second time, over the course of the next week, dumas will proceed with constructing the final level, or set, to extend the garden shaft down to a total depth of some 95 feet, where they hope to intersect the mysterious passageway and find out what it may contain. we\'ve invested a lot of time and energy delineating this tunnel, and i think there\'s great anticipation on everyone\'s part to try to not only put eyes on it, but to see where it may lead. 	CoOI S11E14.1
great anticipation on everyone\'s part to try to not only put eyes on it, but to see where it may lead. if the tunnel predates the shaft, it makes the tunnel far more interesting than just finding a previously unknown tunnel. it\'s all good news. yes, i\'m starting to get eager. all right, let\'s let him get back to work because we\'re poised to finally do this. okey-doke. let\'s go guys. yeah. thanks, paul. okay. thank you, paul. as the operation to deepen the garden shaft continues, we\'re back at it now. yep. h-8. h-8. approximately 60 feet to the southwest, geologist terry matheson and oak island historian charles barkhouse are monitoring a new core drilling operation in borehole h-8, a borehole that was previously excavated in 2017. 	CoOI S11E14.1
historian charles barkhouse are monitoring a new core drilling operation in borehole h-8, a borehole that was previously excavated in 2017. this turned into a very, very interesting hole. for a number of reasons. oh my goodness. what is this? after initially recovering pieces of parchment and leather book binding with a 6-inch diameter core barrel in h-8 rick, marty, and their partner, craig tester, speculated that they may have encountered the fabled chapel vault. a seven foot tall treasure chest encased in concrete that frederick blair and william chappell reportedly drilled into back in 1897 and recovered not only evidence of gold but also a piece of parchment bearing the letters vi. 	CoOI S11E14.1
into back in 1897 and recovered not only evidence of gold but also a piece of parchment bearing the letters vi. come on, baby. it\'s a big hole. incredibly, when the team expanded h-8 by installing a 60-inch caisson in the fall of 2017, a large object was encountered at a depth of 170 feet. he\'s on something. he thinks it\'s perfectly flat. wood? he thinks wood. unfortunately, as the team drove the aj caisson deeper in the hopes of breaching the vault, the plug, or earthen spoils inside of it, fell out, pushing the potential treasure chest somewhere deeper below ground. 	CoOI S11E14.1
the vault, the plug, or earthen spoils inside of it, fell out, pushing the potential treasure chest somewhere deeper below ground. anyway, today, we\'re going back down this hole. all these years later, we did not finish that dig. so it\'s possible that it broke the vault open. so this is going to be a look at the sediments or pieces of the plug, maybe the pieces of treasure, charles. after recent water tests and subsurface scans in this area have offered more evidence of potential valuables. it is rick, marty, and the team\'s hope that if they can pinpoint the possible location of the vault, they will arrange to excavate a much larger diameter caisson in order to recover it. 	CoOI S11E14.1
the possible location of the vault, they will arrange to excavate a much larger diameter caisson in order to recover it. the material that fell out of the h-8 caisson had to have migrated somewhere. possibility certainly exists that this is an area to which the chapel vault is falling. it could be deeper and would certainly press on. so anyway, whatever, we\'re in it to win it. we\'ve got to exhaust all possibilities. cross your fingers that we hit the right section and maybe the best section. and hopefully today we\'ll find out where it went. exactly. while the excavations proceed in the money pit area, in the southeast corner of the triangle-shaped swamp located near the center of oak island. 	CoOI S11E14.1
proceed in the money pit area, in the southeast corner of the triangle-shaped swamp located near the center of oak island. this is a great day. yeah. that is impressive. that should go the distance. yeah. metal detection expert gary drayton, jack begley, and billy gerhardt are about to conduct a new large-scale dig in a region of the swamp  near the potentially 500-year-old stone road. so we\'re going to be digging in the deepest part of the swamp. yeah. we haven\'t really done a whole lot of work in this particular area and it\'s surrounded by really great finds. 	CoOI S11E14.1
we haven\'t really done a whole lot of work in this particular area and it\'s surrounded by really great finds. so with the stone road and stone path, this was a work area, so we got to keep our eyes peeled for anything. right. excellent. well, should we get stuck in? yep. of the many remarkable discoveries that the team has made over the past decade in the swamp, the stone road, or possible ship swamp, may be a critical key to solving the oak island mystery. look at how beautifully constructed. it is not only a near-identical match to a road that rick lagina and members of the team saw in 2021 in alcadao de serra, portugal, where the portuguese sect of the knights templar maintained a stronghold from the 12th to the 17th centuries, this looks old. 	CoOI S11E14.1
where the portuguese sect of the knights templar maintained a stronghold from the 12th to the 17th centuries, this looks old. that does, yeah. yeah. but it is also in an area of the swamp where they have unearthed numerous clues, such as a heavy chain with a hook, suggesting the road was created in order to offload some kind of cargo onto oak island. all right. first bucket of opportunity is coming up. now it is the team\'s hope to find more clues that will help explain the true origin of the stone road and hopefully evidence of valuables. oh gosh, smells like treasure. 	CoOI S11E14.1
oh gosh, smells like treasure. the southeast corner of the bog is the most interesting location for one simple reason. we want to understand the reason for the construct of the stone road. and if it had something to do with the original treasure story, then that whole area is of significant interest. you guys get back to work. i\'m going to poke a bone in the pile and try to see what i can find. ok, mate. come on, where are you? nothing. look, i\'ve said this many times. i hate that swamp because it stinks. but every time we\'ve dug in it, we\'ve recovered interesting stuff, clues. 	CoOI S11E14.1
oh, that\'s a big rock. rick, there\'s something curious about this boulder, unlike other ones in the swamp. it\'s like it\'s sitting on top of the peat, right? which it shouldn\'t be if it\'s glacier, right? so it was moving forward. yeah, i agree. near the stone road in the southeast corner of the swamp, rick lagina and other members of the team have just uncovered a massive boulder that may have been purposely placed into position by someone. but it\'s so by whom and for what purpose? can\'t believe how easy i can move it. the other thing that\'s interesting here is see how it\'s a row of rocks. 	CoOI S11E14.2
the other thing that\'s interesting here is see how it\'s a row of rocks. we got this big flat rock and it\'s like a giant set of stone stairs almost here coming up the bank. hard to say. maybe they were doing work around that boulder. yeah. we know the road is there. we know the path is there. we know the money pit is right there. the opportunities are limitless is what could have went on right in this very spot. absolutely. yep. let\'s just gps it. keep digging. a row or staircase of stones leading to the massive boulder in the southeast corner of the swamp? 	CoOI S11E14.2
keep digging. a row or staircase of stones leading to the massive boulder in the southeast corner of the swamp? could this feature have been constructed as some kind of symbol or marker? and could it be related to the stone road and perhaps created in order to hide something of great value? i\'m not going any deeper. it\'s as though there\'s some sort of rock platform here. so it\'s not well seeded in the organics and the inference is that it was placed there and not deposited by a glacier. that makes it interesting. i like that. and so my first thought really is we need to find a way to take a look at it. 	CoOI S11E14.2
and so my first thought really is we need to find a way to take a look at it. that\'s a board. how deep do you think it was? two feet. yeah, two feet. it\'s out there, though. this is definitely a shaped board. that is thick. check this out, rick. look at the thickness of this. now, this is in good condition, so it\'s got to be a good board. that looks like it could be shipped decking or planking because of the thickness of it. that\'s a big one. but there was no... no, i checked it for fasteners. 	CoOI S11E14.2
that\'s a big one. but there was no... no, i checked it for fasteners. no fasteners. it was two feet down, and it was out there. the planks they are finding could be called ship\'s planking. we\'ve found boards that we think might be associated with a ship. that very near vicinity, of course, one of the most enigmatic finds we\'ve ever made is the ship\'s railing from 600 or 700 ad. so that area hopefully will yield some answers. it\'s worth bringing back, washing it off, take a look, see if there\'s anything on it, nail holes or anything. all right. 	CoOI S11E14.2
worth bringing back, washing it off, take a look, see if there\'s anything on it, nail holes or anything. all right. we\'re finding more questions in the swamp. every time we\'ve undertaken draining it and digging somewhere, we found something and some meaningful something. but no one knows why these things are in the swamp. it\'s swampy. so yeah, would i like an answer to that? yes, i\'d like an answer to that. simple answer would be i\'m hoping for whatever is there. any metal\'s going to stand out in this stuff. that would be something. all right, let\'s see what we can get done. 	CoOI S11E14.2
that would be something. all right, let\'s see what we can get done. later that afternoon, as the excavation and drilling operations continue in the money pit area, near the shoreline on lot 5, located on the western side of the island. wow, you guys have done a lot of work since i last been here. i bet it looks different, doesn\'t it? a lot different. jack begley joins members of the archaeology team as they continue their meticulous excavation of a mysterious stone foundation. a foundation that was discovered earlier this year, buried beneath a circular depression. so what\'s going on over here? 	CoOI S11E14.2
a foundation that was discovered earlier this year, buried beneath a circular depression. so what\'s going on over here? when we first expanded westward, we thought that this stone line feature was going to continue. we assumed that this was where the house structure sat, and that was just a basement. but it is starting to curve in, which is bizarre. it doesn\'t make any sense. but it\'s too big to be a house. it\'s an occupational spot for sure. in the past year, the team has made significant discoveries in and near this feature that suggest it may have been occupied by multiple groups during different time periods. 	CoOI S11E14.2
significant discoveries in and near this feature that suggest it may have been occupied by multiple groups during different time periods. these discoveries include a 14th century lead barter token, which is a compositional match to the lead cross that was discovered at smith\'s cove in 2017. two venetian glass beads, which were not only once considered a form of valuable currency, but which could date to between 1500 and 1650. and several metal tools, which have been scientifically linked to the birthplace of sir william phips the english politician and privateer, who some believe buried a large cache of spanish treasure in the money pit back in 1687. 	CoOI S11E14.2
english politician and privateer, who some believe buried a large cache of spanish treasure in the money pit back in 1687. so the plan today is to make sure that we define this edge really well. well, we\'ve been finding some really good stuff around here. i can\'t wait to see what else we dig up in here. all right, well, let\'s get to work and see if we can figure out what\'s going on here. while the archaeologists remove spoils or earth from the foundation, jeff is sifting them through a screen for clues that might explain how this feature may be connected to the oak island mystery. 	CoOI S11E14.2
sifting them through a screen for clues that might explain how this feature may be connected to the oak island mystery. based upon the different dates, i\'d say this starts to speak more and more to people being on lot 5 earlier. bits of brick and pottery and glass. that\'s pretty cool. hopefully we continue to have more finds and figure out who exactly was here and is it related to the money pit story. thank you. you girls are digging quickly. let us know if we\'re swamping you and we\'ll give you a hand. no, no, no, you\'re fine. i\'m keeping up. 	CoOI S11E14.2
s11e14.3 hey, guys. hey, we have another surprise. cool. i can\'t wait to hear your take on this. near the shoreline of lot 5, located on the western side of oak island, archaeologist laird niven arrives at the mysterious stone foundation after being informed of a potentially important discovery. all of a sudden i hit this stuff that\'s got a lot of ash mixed into it, crushed up shale and stuff. oh, you can hear it. it\'s like a grayish color and it reminds me of like a crude mortar or cement. oh. the mortar looks an awful lot like the mortar that i found when i was washing through money pit material. 	CoOI S11E14.3
the mortar looks an awful lot like the mortar that i found when i was washing through money pit material. oh, really? oh. over the past several years, the oak island team has discovered different forms of concrete in several of the massive caissons they have excavated across the money pit area. a prime example was in 2019, when this type of substance was recovered in the spoils of rf1. a 10-foot diameter caisson located just a few feet northeast of h-8 which was also excavated in the hoax of locating the reportedly concrete-encased chapel vault. we can compare this sample with the money pit sample, see if they come from the same source. 	CoOI S11E14.3
we can compare this sample with the money pit sample, see if they come from the same source. i would love to do that. if you could get me a sample, i\'ll take it right back and see what emma has to say. okay. yeah, sounds good. this is a really difficult feature to get answers from because we don\'t quite understand the structure. so we\'re not exactly sure what we\'re looking for. it\'s important for us to take a sample of this soil. it would be interesting to see if it corresponds with the money pit. and if it does, it would suggest that those areas were operating at the same time and were related. 	CoOI S11E14.3
and if it does, it would suggest that those areas were operating at the same time and were related. excellent. you\'re doing a great job. i like this. i like what\'s coming up. i don\'t know what it is, but i like it. that part out. okay, i\'ll take this back to the lab. perfect. and check in on you later. all right. i need to get back to safety. the following morning, while representatives from dumas contracting limited continue their efforts to deepen the garden shaft in the money pit area, are we getting our car? here it comes, right now. 	CoOI S11E14.3
here it comes, right now. several feet to the southwest. god, i hope something good is in this. marty lagina and his son, alex, join other members of the team at orr hall ha, where they hope to find evidence of the chapel vault somewhere below a depth of 180 feet. it\'s a long one. we\'re ready to slice and dice. we know we had the canister h-8 go down, and it hit something big that moved around underground and went somewhere. we\'re sure of that. yeah, there\'s a lot of water in there. it is possible that h-8 is very near the original money pit, so we have to look deeper. 	CoOI S11E14.3
it is possible that h-8 is very near the original money pit, so we have to look deeper. how deep are we, adam? we\'re at 211. it\'s going to be a mess. let\'s get our hands dirty, gentlemen. ready? this is the silt and the clay. there\'s a few little clumps of material that might have fallen from above. there\'s a little chunk of wood right there. it\'s just below all our silt and whatnot. this sits just on top of bedrock. stand right there, charles. come on, be something. we got something. i got something right here. excellent. everyone wash it down. 	CoOI S11E14.3
come on, be something. we got something. i got something right here. excellent. everyone wash it down. what is that? oh my goodness. cool. this material to here, that could be part of the plug, no question. the plug could have disintegrated and fallen off to one side and all that stuff. that\'s right, the plug that fell out was nine feet or a little over nine feet. right. and they chewed down one side of it, so we could still get a significant size plug on one side or the other because of the vault. if the team has found a portion of the plot or the spoils that may have pushed the chapel vault deeper underground when the h-8 caisson was originally excavated in 2017, could that mean that they are close to pinpointing the legendary chest of valuables? 	CoOI S11E14.3
h-8 caisson was originally excavated in 2017, could that mean that they are close to pinpointing the legendary chest of valuables? hey rick. hey. rick, how you doing? hey. oh, deep are we? well, we\'re at 211 down there. but here\'s the thing, that little bit could have been our plug. because if there was a plug in there, it probably didn\'t stay intact. it probably broke off. well, that and it probably slid the treasure vault to one side or the other. slid to one side or the other, right. so we need to move the rig and come down in another location. 	CoOI S11E14.3
so we need to move the rig and come down in another location. i do believe that material, whatever was contained within it, has fallen to a far greater depth. to what side and what cardinal direction, we don\'t know. i think at this point, the only way to exploit this possible clue is to continue to do some drilling. okay, we need to figure out where the next hole is. sounds like a good plan. yep. thanks, guys. later that afternoon, hey, roger. how are you doing? soggy, but otherwise good. come in and sit down, guys. rick and alex lagina, along with scott barlow, joined roger fortin inside the dumas trailer in the money pit area, where they are about to receive a carbon dating report regarding a wood sample that was obtained one week ago from the possible treasure tunnel located below the garden shaft. 	CoOI S11E14.3
report regarding a wood sample that was obtained one week ago from the possible treasure tunnel located below the garden shaft. we\'re going to call craig and my dad and get the info right from craig. these guys from dumas bought into this process. this is not a job to them. they\'re excited, they\'re interested, they\'re invested. i want to see that somebody\'s been down there a long time. they have a right to know what the fruits of their labor has been. so i hope the results are informative. hey, alex. hey, greg. i got rick, scott, and roger here. 	CoOI S11E14.3
s11e14.4 the wood that came up from the garden shaft is from 1631 to 1684. wow. it is a potentially historic moment for rick, marty, craig, and the oak island team. 34% from 1735 to 1803. from 1529 to 1556. good numbers. that is, yeah, that is something. a carbon dating test that was conducted on a wood sample collected one week ago from the possible treasure tunnel below the garden shop has indicated that the seven foot tall structure could be nearly 400 years old. the original searchers, as far as tunneling, wasn\'t until about 1862. yeah, these are pretty impressive numbers. 	CoOI S11E14.4
the original searchers, as far as tunneling, wasn\'t until about 1862. yeah, these are pretty impressive numbers. this could be original. so there\'s a chance this is connected to the original money pit. part of the offset chamber. right. incredibly, this is the second wood sample taken from the mysterious tunnel this year that has been dated to as early as the 1600s. this means that it was likely constructed more than a century before the discovery of the original money pit. dates are well, well, well before any searcher should have been in this area tunneling. i think that\'s in everybody\'s vision right now, to deepen that garden shaft and find out what\'s down there. 	CoOI S11E14.4
i think that\'s in everybody\'s vision right now, to deepen that garden shaft and find out what\'s down there. you have a tunnel, previously unknown, heading in the direction where these high metal values are being derived. so if this is original work, then you\'re a small step closer to the ultimate solution. we have every reason to continue the process of trying to understand what this tunnel represents. we have to get down there. no, absolutely. and that\'s pretty well our next step where we\'re at right now. it\'s just getting to it, exposing it. i think it\'s going to answer a lot of questions that we have right now. 	CoOI S11E14.4
i think it\'s going to answer a lot of questions that we have right now. yep. these results tell me you need to work faster and get better. yeah. well, look, that\'s just a clear victory for today. get back to picking. hope you don\'t. we\'ll let you get to work, roger. very good. thank you very much, gentlemen. great news. the following morning, as representatives from dumas contracting limited continue deepening the garden shaft in order to breach the tunnel at a depth of some 95 feet. hey, billy. hey, guys. ready to keep rolling, mate? keep rolling, gary, i think, yeah. 	CoOI S11E14.4
hey, billy. hey, guys. ready to keep rolling, mate? keep rolling, gary, i think, yeah. got a lot of water in the hole, but we can see the rock a little better now. jack begley and metal detection expert gary drayton join billy gerhard in the southeast region of the swamp, just north of the potentially 500-year-old stone road. what is the swamp battle plan today? we\'ll go a little more back towards the road and do the same thing. we\'ll reach out. and then continue back towards the peninsula. all right, we\'ll get ready to get stuck in. okay. hopefully not literally. 	CoOI S11E14.4
and then continue back towards the peninsula. all right, we\'ll get ready to get stuck in. okay. hopefully not literally. billy, gary and jack are eager to confirm the potential breakthrough discovery they made two days ago of yet another man-made stone pathway in the swamp, which appears to be leading toward a massive boulder. this is where the real fun is, gary. yep. see if we get lucky. we have found all of these structures. they imply purpose, intent. to me, there\'s only two trains of thought here to try to explain the why of the structures found in the swamp. 	CoOI S11E14.4
me, there\'s only two trains of thought here to try to explain the why of the structures found in the swamp. one, they were ancillary to other work, whether that be in the money pit or elsewhere. or two there was depositional work in the bog proper and these facilitated that work see oh i think we got a bit of planking here oh yeah oh yeah yeah definitely planking look got that like tunneling groove effect going on it yeah wooden planking a siding that looks intentional to me yeah more bits of the ship yeah for sure good eye gary oh look how deep it came out of look on the other side too yeah tug and groove does that go back quite a long time yeah all right, i\'ll set it aside. 	CoOI S11E14.4
side too yeah tug and groove does that go back quite a long time yeah all right, i\'ll set it aside. okay, mate. we\'re finding a lot of decking or planks, which is very interesting, because we are actually way out in the swamp. are these planks and these decks part of a mystery ship waiting to be found in the swamp? that would be absolutely unbelievable. they\'re still slopping. i hear clanging. is he hitting rocks? yeah, he\'s got a rock in his bucket. yeah, it\'s a lot of rocks in line with that big rock in the shore, but to the side, there\'s none. 	CoOI S11E14.4
s11e14.5 hey, guys. hey, rick. anything? billy feels like he might have found some other structure. it\'s just hard to see underneath the muck. yeah. billy, why don\'t you tell him what you feel like you can feel? it\'s a lot of rocks in line with that big rock. but as you move this way, there\'s no stones at all. yeah. after being alerted that more of a possible stone ramp, which may be connected to a large boulder, has been uncovered in the southeast corner of the swamp, rick lagina joins billy gerhardt, jack begley, and gary drayton to help investigate the curious feature. 	CoOI S11E14.5
southeast corner of the swamp, rick lagina joins billy gerhardt, jack begley, and gary drayton to help investigate the curious feature. a little bit of mud on top of them, but they\'re most definitely there. yeah. and this boulder is about the size of some of those other nolan\'s cross rocks. yeah. definitely conical shape. a cone-shaped boulder in the swamp and similar to those in nolan\'s cross? first identified in 1981 by the late fred nolan, nolan\'s cross is a perfectly symmetrical megalithic formation of six boulders near the center of oak island. over the years, numerous researchers have speculated that the cross is a symbol indicating that the hidden treasure includes priceless religious relic, such as the holy grail. 	CoOI S11E14.5
speculated that the cross is a symbol indicating that the hidden treasure includes priceless religious relic, such as the holy grail. nolan\'s cross may lead us to a money pit location and where the treasure might be. and others, like architect brian farrell, believe the feature represents a treasure map, which points to the location of buried valuables in the money pit area. you\'ve got to dig on that side of it and this side of it, because then we could shovel it off and take a look. yeah. could this cone-shaped boulder and the possible stone ramp be related to nolan\'s cross? 	CoOI S11E14.5
yeah. could this cone-shaped boulder and the possible stone ramp be related to nolan\'s cross? if so, might they represent clues that are connected to high-trace evidence of precious metals that have been detected in the money pit? or could it be related to valuables that are buried in the triangle-shaped swamp? i would like to know definitively that the constructs within this body of the bog are related to the mystery. is it perhaps associated with original depositional work? my hope is that as we excavate the ramp in association with the stone road, we will hopefully find some artifacts that will help with that explanation. 	CoOI S11E14.5
excavate the ramp in association with the stone road, we will hopefully find some artifacts that will help with that explanation. it fits all the parameters. it\'s big enough to step on, and it\'s right at the interface between the muck and the water. i mean, that\'s like a nolan\'s cross boulder there. yeah. we may have discovered something really important there, mate. just got to work on it, clean it off. well, it\'s no question it\'s pretty unique. when you see all the digging we did today, there\'s something going on there. so, yeah. yeah. if there\'s a ramp, you know, there\'s a possibility of defining it and looking for artifacts. 	CoOI S11E14.5
so, yeah. yeah. if there\'s a ramp, you know, there\'s a possibility of defining it and looking for artifacts. so that might be an aha moment. yeah. so keep digging and see what we see. ok. later that afternoon. thanks, jeff. at the interpretive center. how\'s it going, laird? hey. hey, how are you? you called? it is. rick, his nephew alex, jack, and scott barlow meet with archaeologist laird niven and archaeometallurgist emma culligan for an update on the concrete-like substance that was unearthed two days ago in the stone foundation on lot 5. so this is a soil sample. 	CoOI S11E14.5
so this is a soil sample. soil that jamie thought was mortar. and it was important enough, we thought, to compare it to some of the mortar that you were getting in the money pit. yeah. and emma has the results of the comparison. great. in order to analyze the believed concrete from lot 5, emma has scanned it with an x-ray diffraction device, or xrd, which uses x-rays to determine the chemical composition and physical properties of materials. so i compared it to mortar samples that i have on file, and it did not match, so it\'s not mortar. and it had some differences to other soil samples collected from lot 5. 	CoOI S11E14.5
and it had some differences to other soil samples collected from lot 5. so i ran a comparison to the entire soil database that i have so far. and on the screen, you can see a cluster diagram that i have of the main soil samples. and our sample in that grouping, it\'s an almost exact match to a money pit sample at a depth of 104 feet. wow. that\'s great. so which borehole did this come out of in the money pit? so there\'s a few. c-28, c-18.5, and also the garden shaft. wow. great. amazing. that\'s close to a tunnel below the garden shaft. 	CoOI S11E14.5
s11e14.5 ...matches with money pit soil samples found near the garden shaft. great! amazing. it is a potentially critical moment for rick lagina and members of the oak island team. i should point out that the little tiny piece we thought was mortar, but it\'s not natural. so it\'s not naturally occurring, so it must have been replaced there is what you\'re saying? yes. exactly. archaeometallurgist emma culligan has determined that a mysterious type of artificial soil, which was recently unearthed in the stone foundation on lot 5, matches others that have been collected by the team some 100 feet deep in the money pit area, and in the same region as the possible treasure tunnel located several feet below the garden shaft. 	CoOI S11E14.6
the money pit area, and in the same region as the possible treasure tunnel located several feet below the garden shaft. we were always looking for a connection between lot 5 and the money pit. i didn\'t think you could get it from the xrd. it was an exciting possibility. right, yeah. and if we think about the interpretation that we\'re most interested in, that would be somebody physically transporting the same soil from one to the other, it doesn\'t matter which way. yeah. and this might show that the lot 5 feature was somehow related to the early excavations or the deposit of the treasure. 	CoOI S11E14.6
this might show that the lot 5 feature was somehow related to the early excavations or the deposit of the treasure. that\'s the hope. yeah, that\'s one thing we\'ve been looking for on the island is evidence of people staying here while they did the work. we haven\'t found that at all. yeah, you know the last reports that we\'ve got on the wood samples from the tunnel, there is a strong possibility that it was pre-searcher from the 1600s. which would be huge. which would be huge. yeah, those dates do work pretty well with the phips theory. yeah, absolutely. 	CoOI S11E14.6
which would be huge. yeah, those dates do work pretty well with the phips theory. yeah, absolutely. phips was in the area. yeah. in early 1687, the english naval captain and politician william phips recovered approximately 34 tons of treasure in the caribbean sea from the famed spanish wreck known as the concepcion. later that year, king james ii of england knighted phips for his achievement and ordered him to conduct a second operation to recover the nearly 65 tons of valuables that were believed to remain on the wreck. according to its manifest, phips made the journey with the help of a freemason from nova scotia named andrew belcher. 	CoOI S11E14.6
according to its manifest, phips made the journey with the help of a freemason from nova scotia named andrew belcher. but curiously, they returned with less than two tons of the riches. i see it as a possible link between the lot 5 and the money pit, and i think we should try to prove it. yeah, absolutely. could alex lagina be correct that the matching soil samples from the foundation on lot 5 and the area around the potentially 17th century tunnel beneath the garden shaft offer evidence that phips hid the majority of his discoveries from the concepcion on oak island? 	CoOI S11E14.6
tunnel beneath the garden shaft offer evidence that phips hid the majority of his discoveries from the concepcion on oak island? here we have a very interesting connection, i can\'t deny it, with these specific timelines and the significant interest in lot 5. one could make the association to the salvage of the concepcion, and it could change the way we perceive the relationship between lot 5 and the money. but until we get to the bottom of the excavation, i think every possibility is on the table at this point. that\'s why it\'s incumbent on us to figure out what the structure was. 	CoOI S11E14.6
that\'s why it\'s incumbent on us to figure out what the structure was. yeah, absolutely. the association that could be made is potentially mind-blowing. let\'s just stay the course and move forward. yeah, okay. all right. thanks, laird. thanks, alan. all right. thank you. see you later. good job. after more than a decade of tireless work and perseverance through numerous unforeseen challenges, rick, marty and their team may be closer than ever to unearthing the answers that many before them were unable to reach. as they dig deeper into the swamp on lot 5 and below the garden shaft, will they finally reveal not only what lies hidden on oak island, but also the truth behind this 229-year-old mystery? 	CoOI S11E14.6
thanks for watching! this is one of the reasons why we actually come down. sure. it\'s this relationship, if there is one, between the stone and that little stone walkway, we\'ll call it. as another day begins on oak island, for brothers rick and marty lagina and their team, they are hoping that a recently unearthed discovery in the triangle-shaped swamp might offer new critical clues that will help them solve a 229-year-old mystery. so what are your thoughts upon initial observation? yeah, this feature that bill\'s uncovering, that is very suspicious to me, especially the angularity of the rocks. right. 	CoOI S11E15.1
yeah, this feature that bill\'s uncovering, that is very suspicious to me, especially the angularity of the rocks. right. rick, there\'s something curious about this boulder. one week ago, while digging just north of the potentially 500-year-old stone road or ship\'s warf in the southeast corner of the swamp. the team uncovered what appeared to be another stone walkway leading to a massive boulder. and this boulder is about the size of some of those other nolan cross rocks. yep. curiously, the boulder at the end of the believed walkway bears a striking resemblance to the five cone-shaped boulders that were discovered in 1981 by the late fred nolan, which form a perfectly symmetrical megalithic cross. 	CoOI S11E15.1
the five cone-shaped boulders that were discovered in 1981 by the late fred nolan, which form a perfectly symmetrical megalithic cross. i think what we should do is get billy to wash this. mm-hmm. that would help us understand that this is human-made. the why is going to be very difficult. yeah. billy, you\'re up. okay. the team is hoping that geoscientist dr. ian spooner can determine not only if this feature was indeed constructed by man, but also when it may have been created and what sort of function it might have served. there is part of what i call the book about oak island. 	CoOI S11E15.1
there is part of what i call the book about oak island. some of those pages are yet to be written about what the swamp holds, what the mysteries are within, and why that work was done. good? that should be fine, just let it drain. okay. i don\'t think you\'ll ever come to a conclusive answer to this mystery without understanding what happened in that bog. what stands out to me is this stone and this stone, this stone and this stone, all in a line when there\'s nothing over to the right hand side. that\'s not natural. i\'m pretty confident it\'s a human-made structure. 	CoOI S11E15.1
that\'s not natural. i\'m pretty confident it\'s a human-made structure. what i do know is a rock like this didn\'t come from the beach. and my contention is a lot of the rocks from this came from an excavation, not from a beach. from excavations? like the digging of the money pit. something like formed the mysterious walkway? a geological type that would have come from deep underground? could jack\'s notion that they were placed in the swamp by those who created the original money pit be correct? or since the team has found evidence throughout the swamp suggesting that it may be an entirely artificially made feature, could these rocks have come from a deep excavation that was conducted in order to hide something of great value right in this area. 	CoOI S11E15.1
have come from a deep excavation that was conducted in order to hide something of great value right in this area. the more you dig, the more you look in the body of the swamp property, you find human constructs. why are they there? they apply purpose, intent. i do believe that we can connect these dots. hey guys. hey steve. hey tom, good to see you. so what you see is what you see, but i\'ll let the two of you describe what you know. yeah, what we know is the stones are placed by people. mm-hmm. it\'s kind of almost a little bit like a mini stone road. 	CoOI S11E15.1
mm-hmm. it\'s kind of almost a little bit like a mini stone road. well, that\'s what i\'m seeing, the similarity. yeah. you have a great elevation, so to me it looks like at least a ramp of some sort. i think the next steps are to leave this, and we haven\'t gone to the other end. we need to continue looking for features. yeah. for now, that shoreline is the most important area. that\'s where people traveled. now let\'s just take a look over there. and we let billy loose and keep digging. sure. let\'s keep digging. and who knows what else we\'re gonna find around here. 	CoOI S11E15.1
sure. let\'s keep digging. and who knows what else we\'re gonna find around here. while the investigation proceeds in the triangle-shaped swamp. hey, scott. hey, charles. so where are we today? well, as you can see here, the boys are just working on deepening the shaft here right now. okay. in the money pit area. scott barlow and charles barkhouse are supervising the operation to deepen the mid-18th century structure known as the garden shaft down to a depth of some 95 feet. yeah, a good grab there. yeah. an operation that may soon lead the team to the valuables that people have been trying to find since the treasure hunt began in 1795. 	CoOI S11E15.1
soon lead the team to the valuables that people have been trying to find since the treasure hunt began in 1795. they\'re probably within a foot or two above where the top of the tunnel should be. oh. so they\'ve been making good progress. they\'re excited today. i can\'t wait to see it. yeah, you and i both. in the coming days, representatives from duma\'s contracting limited will finish installing the final set in the garden shaft extension where they hope to breach a seven-foot high tunnel that may not only be as much as 400 years old, which leads to an area that has been dubbed the baby blob. 	CoOI S11E15.1
not only be as much as 400 years old, which leads to an area that has been dubbed the baby blob. it is in this region where the team has obtained water samples from previously drilled boreholes that indicate a large cache of silver, gold, and other metal objects could be buried between depths of 80 and 120 feet. at this stage, based on what we see, it is quite possible that this is not a searcher meaning a depositor tunnel. and we still have the anomalous metals in the water near the garden shaft. so we have to get to the bottom of that. 	CoOI S11E15.1
so we have to get to the bottom of that. shouldn\'t be too much longer before they reset top of the tunnel. let\'s hear what they have to say. hey ronnie, can you hear me? go ahead. how was it down there? we just took a measurement there and after long we had just over 92 feet and i was just okay, well we\'ll let you get back to work. you\'re doing a great job. we\'ll let you know when we get something. we\'re really looking forward to it. thanks. as the search operations continue on oak island, later that afternoon. 	CoOI S11E15.1
we\'re really looking forward to it. thanks. as the search operations continue on oak island, later that afternoon. these field trips are usually quite rewarding. absolutely. this is the print shop. scott barlow and oak island historian, doug kroll have traveled some 50 miles northeast to halifax, nova scotia. hey joe. hi. good to see you again. good to see you. here, they have arranged to meet with ancient documents and leather expert, joe landry at dawson print shop to have him examine part of a potentially ancient shoe that was discovered two weeks ago in the southeast corner of the swamp. 	CoOI S11E15.1
him examine part of a potentially ancient shoe that was discovered two weeks ago in the southeast corner of the swamp. so we uncovered a stone road, if you will, in the swamp. sure. and this was found just off to the side of it. it was found by rick and gary when they were at their metal detecting. it\'ll be curious to see what joe thinks of this shoe leather. hopefully he can confirm that that is what it is and give us an idea of the age of it. oh, yes. this is hand stitched. it\'s very fine work. 	CoOI S11E15.1
oh, yes. this is hand stitched. it\'s very fine work. this is a shoe or light boot, on looks and things. okay. and it would have been a gentleman\'s boot. interesting. yes. does the leather itself tell you anything? well, it appears to be a vegetable tan leather. when you say a vegetable tan, that\'s just basically, they were using a vegetable to color it. that\'s right. that\'s one of the earliest forms of tan-age. oh, really? yeah. can you tell anything from the stitching what age the shoe may have come from? yeah. you\'re talking like 1600s, early 1700s. oh wow, that\'s great. 	CoOI S11E15.1
1700s. wow, that\'s very cool. and as you can see, this is amazing, something like this is still intact after all those years. it is well preserved, i\'ll tell you that. at the dawson print shop in halifax, nova scotia. that was beautiful, beautiful work. leather expert joe landry has just given his assessment that the piece of a leather boot, which was recently found near the stone road in the oak island swamp, could date back more than a century before the discovery of the money pit. who would have worn a boot like this? well, it would have been an officer, you know, who could afford a fine boot like this rather than a general crew member. 	CoOI S11E15.2
would have been an officer, you know, who could afford a fine boot like this rather than a general crew member. well, i find that very interesting because it speaks to somebody who wasn\'t doing the work, but probably dictating the work. yes, and this, it\'s quite plain to see, was hand-stitched. this would have been more likely done in europe, in prague. oh, really? yes, yeah. it speaks to me of french work, although, you know, it was practiced quite widely. so at this point, we can\'t rule out the portuguese, the french, or the british. they all remain a suspect. 	CoOI S11E15.2
so at this point, we can\'t rule out the portuguese, the french, or the british. they all remain a suspect. or even the spanish. i mean, they did find where the works were. joe\'s observations are pointing to a pre-discovery of the money thing. i mean, this is important for the search because we\'re always trying to figure out what to investigate further. it\'s a possibility that this was the toll. what needs further testing. and this lines up with so many of our artifacts. has the team found another critical piece of evidence that could help them narrow in on the identity of those who created the stone road and the recently uncovered walkway and boulder feature in the swamp? 	CoOI S11E15.2
on the identity of those who created the stone road and the recently uncovered walkway and boulder feature in the swamp? if so, could it also help reveal who was responsible for the high trace evidence of precious metals that have been detected in the money pit area? we knew when it was leather that you were the man to come and see first. yeah, we really appreciate your input on this. you\'re quite welcome. until next time. that was interesting. doug and scott begin their return journey. miners reporting for duty. back on oak island. the boys are calling you the silver fox. 	CoOI S11E15.2
miners reporting for duty. back on oak island. the boys are calling you the silver fox. rick and marty lagina are about to join the operation to help dumas reach the potential treasure tunnel located just below the garden shaft. what are we gonna do? explain to us what we\'re gonna do. so we gotta excavate a little bit more. we gotta chip some of that clay and then we can put another set in. okay. where now is 93 feet. gotta be within two feet then. yeah, somewhere around there. yeah. well, let\'s get suited up and have a go at this, big brother. 	CoOI S11E15.2
yeah, somewhere around there. yeah. well, let\'s get suited up and have a go at this, big brother. before dumas can finish construction on the final wooden set that will extend the garden shaft into the tunnel, several feet of hard clay must be removed. it is a task that rick and marty are more than eager to help complete. well, it\'s going to be exciting to go down in that shaft and actually do some digging and maybe be part of unearthing an original tunnel would be incredibly gratifying. all kinds of thoughts are streaming through my head. i mean, you can\'t help it. 	CoOI S11E15.2
all kinds of thoughts are streaming through my head. i mean, you can\'t help it. this is an exciting moment. ready? we\'re gonna go down deep into the garden shaft, big brother and i. all set. let\'s go. my brother and i are gonna be miners and our heritage is mining. our grandfather came here in order to work in the mines of michigan. it\'s really an amazing thing that\'s happening here, a confluence of heritage. very good. that\'s right. now we can begin. marty, that\'s going to be your corner over there. that\'s going to be your corner over there. 	CoOI S11E15.2
marty, that\'s going to be your corner over there. that\'s going to be your corner over there. okay. yours is called the destroyer. mine is? yeah, yours is the destroyer. all right. you\'ve got to take that seat. cool. well, here\'s the deal, rick. you could be standing a couple feet above the tunnel we\'ve been looking for for at least two years. right there. good. we are. okay, well, let\'s get busy. how do you work this thing? okay. this is about 60 pounds. a little bit at a time. yeah, ok. something going on? silver fox in his brother ready to go. 	CoOI S11E15.2
a little bit at a time. yeah, ok. something going on? silver fox in his brother ready to go. there\'s the airline. ordered to break up the hard clay below the shaft, rick and marty are using a pneumatic jackhammer. then representatives from dumas contracting limited will use the three-ton hammer grab tool to remove the materials. the back hammers themselves weigh 60 or 70 pounds. they tend to get stuck in the clay. it is some of the hardest work i\'ve done in many years. alright, break time. i\'m down there. i want to get that clay out of the hole. 	CoOI S11E15.2
alright, break time. i\'m down there. i want to get that clay out of the hole. i want to find the tunnel. i didn\'t think of much else to be honest. think you hit? the last spade bit i thought i hit something different. it\'s digging right up there. look at that, it\'s nothing. it\'s really soft. do you have a bar? yeah, right there. i don\'t know if that\'s rock or wood, but it\'s movable right there. come in. i thought at the bottom of the spade bit that i was on top of something, and i thought, wow, wow, maybe i\'m on a tunnel. 	CoOI S11E15.2
of the spade bit that i was on top of something, and i thought, wow, wow, maybe i\'m on a tunnel. could rick lagina\'s speculation that he may have reached the mysterious and potentially ancient tunnel be correct? so the team may be closer than ever to the answers and reward that they worked for more than a decade to uncover. there\'s something right there. it\'s that far away. right there is a relative term, right there is a relative term. all right, well, we got it all loosened up for you. is it all the hammer-grab is going to come down? 	CoOI S11E15.2
is it all the hammer-grab is going to come down? yeah, the hammer-grab will be not over. wood delineates man-made things, obviously, when it\'s way underground. so we need to keep going. we could be closer than we\'ve ever been to this actual treasure or to where it was deposited. so when we start to go to the tunnel, are you guys going to come down for a day or what? yes. yeah, to try and keep us out. that\'s going to be an experience. that would be cool. we\'ve got to be really cool. we\'ve got to be. discussed today is an alignment that i found by the templars. 	CoOI S11E15.2
one, two, three, four. representatives from dumas contracting limited finish extending the garden shaft down to the believed treasure tunnel in the money pit area. so gentlemen, i have no need to introduce chris morford to everyone here. rick lagina along with other members of the team meet once again with author and 32nd degree freemason chris morford in the war room. in recent years chris and his research partner corian mall have assisted the team both on the island and in numerous destinations across europe to investigate the incredible theory that the medieval order of the knights templar and their believed descendants known as the freemasons made repeated visits to oak island between the 12th and 18th centuries in order to find items of great historic and monetary value. 	CoOI S11E15.3
visits to oak island between the 12th and 18th centuries in order to find items of great historic and monetary value. i actually look forward to the presentation. i think it\'s gonna be informative and quite interesting. so please proceed. thank you, rick. thank you, everybody. what i\'d like to discuss today is an alignment that i found with nolan\'s cross. now, in light of the team\'s ongoing efforts to locate the source of precious metals that have been detected in the money pit area. so you can see here nolan\'s cross. chris has conducted new research that he believes could help them pinpoint it using the megalithic boulders of nolan\'s cross. 	CoOI S11E15.3
chris has conducted new research that he believes could help them pinpoint it using the megalithic boulders of nolan\'s cross. now who placed those stones there as well as why is a question that has been nagging all of us for decades. so i go through the trouble of moving these enormous stones into such an arrangement. i believe this structure was built by the templars and the templars may have used the alignment of nolan\'s cross to guide us to the treasure. this treasure is said to be no less than the holy grail itself. this goes back to the research that corey and i have done. 	CoOI S11E15.3
this goes back to the research that corey and i have done. i do believe that the original temple menorah was safeguarded here to make way for the new jerusalem and the new temple. between the 12th and 14th centuries, the military order of the knights templar fiercely battled for christian interests in the middle east and europe during the holy wars known as the crusades. after building their headquarters on the site of the original temple of king solomon in jerusalem, they accumulated vast riches by establishing the world\'s first banking system. however, some believe that their great treasure also included priceless relics that they discovered during excavations beneath the temple ruins, including king solomon\'s golden menorah and the holy grail. 	CoOI S11E15.3
included priceless relics that they discovered during excavations beneath the temple ruins, including king solomon\'s golden menorah and the holy grail. in 1307, the order was disbanded and persecuted by the pope and the king of france over controversial charges of heresies. many were imprisoned and executed. however, their believed sacred treasures have never been found. is it possible that some of these relics are buried on oak island as chris norford believes? and could nolan\'s cross hold the key to locating where they are buried? i spent a lot of time wondering what clues would these knights have left for the future brothers to locate the treasure so that their enemies or the uninitiated would not be able to find it. 	CoOI S11E15.3
the future brothers to locate the treasure so that their enemies or the uninitiated would not be able to find it. nolan\'s cross couldn\'t be the answer. i needed a first step and the most obvious to me was cone c upon the beach. this would be the only stone visible from a ship. as you leave cone c, of course, you will hit cone a. they actually have a nice sight line to each other and straight to the money pit. but still, you would need markers to help you get from that point to the money pit. because it\'s pretty easy to wander off course. 	CoOI S11E15.3
because it\'s pretty easy to wander off course. i saw on some updated maps you have that there were two drilled stones. remarkably. it seems to me they were intentionally put there as markers. yep, we had one on lot 15, and the other one was on the nolan property. well, remember, there was another drilled stone in the money pit area that frederick blair was found. yes. in 1895, treasure hunter frederick blair discovered a mysterious drilled stone in the money pit area. although the stone was moved during future searcher excavations, its original location was marked on a survey conducted by charles roper in the 1930s. 	CoOI S11E15.3
was moved during future searcher excavations, its original location was marked on a survey conducted by charles roper in the 1930s. more than three decades later, fred nolan noted two additional drilled stones during surveys that he conducted between the swamp and the money pit. could chris morford be correct that these drilled stones were related to nolan\'s cross and placed as markers in order to help pinpoint the location of the fabled oak island treasure. so when you get to the money pit area, i would think that there was a marker there and then from there you would know where to dig. 	CoOI S11E15.3
pit area, i would think that there was a marker there and then from there you would know where to dig. we should get proper measurements and see if we can have it aligned through the money pit, because what are the chances we run into these two drilled stones right through cone a and cone c? maybe we can project where the money pit was. that could be highly relevant. chris, do you believe that templars or descendants or versions of the templars came and did the work here? either is plausible. it\'s so romantic to think that the templars come to this tiny nondescript island. 	CoOI S11E15.3
either is plausible. it\'s so romantic to think that the templars come to this tiny nondescript island. they do this incredible amount of work. and then chris has taken that to help put an x on the ground on oak island, it doesn\'t prove anything, but the line created by cone c, the drilled stones, and cone a may ultimately assist us in finding the original money, and that\'s the goal. i certainly believe that research is a huge component to figure out what happened here on this island long ago. so the debt of gratitude lays on our heads and our shoulders to you. 	CoOI S11E15.3
so tom, i suppose you wonder why we asked you to come out today, right? well, i know roughly where we are here as i look at that. exactly, cone c of nolan\'s cross. following their meeting with 32nd degree freemason chris morford, rick lagina and steve guptill, join fellow oak island landowner tom nolan on his property at cone c, the northernmost boulder near the shoreline which marks the so-called left arm of nolan\'s cross. we had a theorist come, chris morford, you\'re quite familiar with him. he made association between cone c, cone a, drilled stones, and aligned it to the money pit. 	CoOI S11E15.4
he made association between cone c, cone a, drilled stones, and aligned it to the money pit. wow. it is rick\'s intention to have steve, a professional surveyor, track the line from cone c through several drilled stones, as well as cone a of nolan\'s cross, and finally, to the money pit area where chris morford believes the precise location of the fabled oak island treasure may be buried deep underground. okay, let\'s go. we\'re all excited. we want to measure it ourselves. we want to walk the line. hopefully we corroborate what chris has suggested. we have to find out where it goes, specifically in the money pit. 	CoOI S11E15.4
hopefully we corroborate what chris has suggested. we have to find out where it goes, specifically in the money pit. alright, so this is our first drilled stone. yep. and for reference, i\'ll tag it again. okie dokie. all right, let me take you to cone a. okay. so i\'m going to do my best to actually walk the line. as we walk that line, we know the elevation will change. that\'s the reason for the drilled stones. the purpose is to draw an alignment between cone c and perhaps the location of a treasure. all right, so we all know this is cone a. 	CoOI S11E15.4
all right, so we all know this is cone a. yep. i\'m going to tag it and then calculate the next point. okay. thank you. all right, go to there. follow me through. okay. so i\'m currently on the line. through here. yep. as we walk the line, we\'re getting closer to the money pit. i\'m excited to see where it goes. so here\'s the next drilled stone. it\'s right online. can i just see that? sure, ken, i\'m gonna tag it while i\'m here. you see how they would have turned the chisel. yes, as they were going. so here\'s an observation. 	CoOI S11E15.4
you see how they would have turned the chisel. yes, as they were going. so here\'s an observation. this is the exact path point from cone c in the water to lot 15. and the next half is the money pit. so this is almost perfectly half the distance. what are the odds of that? i don\'t know. for christian to make this observation and then have these measurements play out as they are, quite remarkable. really is. i\'d be very curious if it\'s half again the measurement to the money pit. let\'s find out. follow me. it\'s quite remarkable that drill stone on lot 15 is exactly halfway from cone c to the money pit. 	CoOI S11E15.4
it\'s quite remarkable that drill stone on lot 15 is exactly halfway from cone c to the money pit. so now what we need to do is walk the other half to the money pit. so the next stop is our end point. so i\'ll take you to the end point. okay. watch your step here. the final location, or the other half of the distance from lot 15, is right here. oh my goodness. as you can see, it\'s not perfectly on the shaft, but what it isn\'t on top of is the tunnel. really? yeah. wow. the bingo point, if you will, is almost exactly where the tunnel under the garden shaft is. 	CoOI S11E15.4
really? yeah. wow. the bingo point, if you will, is almost exactly where the tunnel under the garden shaft is. now that\'s quite remarkable. that\'s pretty close. pretty close. that\'s pretty darn close. but to have that line based on two of the stones of nolan\'s cross and two drilled stones land on that corner of the garden shaft, that\'s dramatic. now we have to expose the bottom of the structure and exploit that information. we have to come to a further understanding of what this tunnel potentially represents. yep. we\'re a ways from that yet. yeah. but for right now, there\'s a lot of work to do. 	CoOI S11E15.4
yep. we\'re a ways from that yet. yeah. but for right now, there\'s a lot of work to do. so let\'s get to it. okay. sounds good. as the operation to deepen the garden shaft continues in the money pit area. i\'m really interested to see what we dig up over here as we continue digging along the stone path. yeah. jack begley, along with gary drayton and billy gerhardt are proceeding with their excavation to the north of the newly uncovered stone walkway or ramp. let\'s go. yeah. where they hope to find additional evidence of man-made structures and very valuables. 	CoOI S11E15.4
let\'s go. yeah. where they hope to find additional evidence of man-made structures and very valuables. what a source of that! that\'s a big stump. it\'s a big tree. makes you wonder how big the trees used to be. yeah. i took a big fella to get this down. this is giving me hope. every time i see a trunk like that coming out, that means the woods, the forest was more in there. like dr. spooner said, this did not used to be a swamp. nope. it used to allow trees to grow. exactly. the stump of a tree unearthed from the deepest area of the swamp, because trees cannot generally grow in bodies of water. 	CoOI S11E15.4
stump of a tree unearthed from the deepest area of the swamp, because trees cannot generally grow in bodies of water. the team has found more evidence to support dr. ian spooner\'s belief that the swamp was at least a partially man-made feature. no, no metals. we\'re metal-less. but the wood more than makes up for it. it\'s about the context and the wood was found at the very bottom of the swamp and it wasn\'t thrown in later. this is, this is wood from a very old source. if dr. spooner can successfully date this storm. could it help the team confirm when the swamp was artificially created? 	CoOI S11E15.4
if dr. spooner can successfully date this storm. could it help the team confirm when the swamp was artificially created? billy, this was perfect timing, mate, getting these interesting pieces of wood out. we know that that storm\'s coming from down south, and we are gonna get drenched. you can feel it. the air is changing. you see, i mean, the swamp\'s gonna fill up for sure. those stumps are pretty unique. we should get wrecked down here to take a look at them. oh, we will. yeah. yeah, great work, billy, mate. see you later, mate. coming up. there\'s something going on there. 	CoOI S11E15.4
what a glorious day of being in the swamp rick. new day, fresh dig. as another day dawns on oak island. rick lagina has joined gary drayton and billy gerhardt to continue their investigation near the middle of the triangle-shaped swamp. there might be a story here that we\'re standing on and don\'t even know it. yeah. all right, let\'s find some good stuff. because a heavy overnight rainstorm has partially refilled the swamp,  the team is now excavating several feet to the north of where they discovered a large tree stump and possible evidence of ancient human activity just one day ago. 	CoOI S11E15.5
the north of where they discovered a large tree stump and possible evidence of ancient human activity just one day ago. pulling up another stone. that layer there, that\'s a change, a significant change. how did it go from forest land and when to the deep water cold? i think it might prove when somebody did something here. yeah. we know that, according to dr. spooner, and certainly the evidence is there, that at one point the swamp was forested. now the key question is, was that manipulated? hopefully dr. spooner can provide us with some answers. trunk in a notch there or not even like it was actual? 	CoOI S11E15.5
spooner can provide us with some answers. trunk in a notch there or not even like it was actual? if that broke off, the logs would be laying right there beside it, i think. oh, absolutely. right? and it\'s not... it\'s not there. and it\'s just not there. somebody took the logs. yeah. oh yeah. for something, maybe to build a money pit. could billy gerhardt be correct that long ago, trees were removed from this area when it was dry land? in order to construct the nine wooden platforms of rounded logs that were reportedly discovered more than two centuries ago in the original money pit. 	CoOI S11E15.5
the nine wooden platforms of rounded logs that were reportedly discovered more than two centuries ago in the original money pit. yeah, i don\'t know. we need dr. spooner to weigh in. yeah, sure. to see if he can date when that event happened. yeah. okay, for right now, i\'m going to take off. you guys are in charge. hopefully you\'ll find some more things. okay, mate. thanks, billy. yep. good luck. as gary and billy continue their excavation for answers in the swamp. it seems like we hit your target, finally. we found her. yeah. ha ha ha. rick likina, scott barlow, and craig tester have just received long-awaited news. 	CoOI S11E15.5
we found her. yeah. ha ha ha. rick likina, scott barlow, and craig tester have just received long-awaited news. after extending the garden shaft to an approximate depth of 95 feet in the money pit area, representatives from duma\'s contracting limited have finally reached a believed seven foot high tunnel that leads toward the baby blob and perhaps a vast cache of buried treasure. can actually see wood. okay. but it\'s either collapsed or whatever, who knows what. yeah. yeah. till we uncover more of it. okay. get us dressed, let\'s get going. okay. hey. finally, we can actually put eyes and boots on the tunnel that was found by the sonic drill program. 	CoOI S11E15.5
hey. finally, we can actually put eyes and boots on the tunnel that was found by the sonic drill program. you get a little bit of chills. let\'s go take a peek. it\'s been frustratingly slow at times, but it\'s exciting. good luck, guys. take your picture. thanks. if it was original, it\'s our belief that we\'re talking hundreds of years ago. whoa. now that raises the bar. there\'s hope, there\'s promise. you might find the one thing. so i think there are some answers here. okay, so what are we looking at here, paul? so that\'s where we got the sample out of the wood. 	CoOI S11E15.5
exciting, right? something there though. it is a historic and exciting moment for rick and marty lagina, their partner craig tester and their entire team. you got the crowbar right behind you? here, go right. at the bottom of the garden shaft in the fabled money pit area, a wooden tunnel that may lead to a legendary cache of buried treasure has finally been reached at a depth of some 95 feet. you know, there\'s something going on there. definitely wood. there\'s a wrong log right? you can see the end. hear that? isn\'t it so hollow? yeah. listen to that. 	CoOI S11E15.6
there\'s a wrong log right? you can see the end. hear that? isn\'t it so hollow? yeah. listen to that. that\'s one of the beams. this beam is not hollow like that. there\'s only so much you can see between the clay and the water. but it\'s real, and that\'s the important part. there\'s a wood structure down there, and at that point it becomes, okay, can\'t stop now. if you want to expose more of it, you can add one more section, and then go deeper, that\'ll give us another 32 inches. you have to go deeper. absolutely. the board this way, if you pound on it, it sounds hollow to me, like there\'s empty space below that. 	CoOI S11E15.6
the board this way, if you pound on it, it sounds hollow to me, like there\'s empty space below that. right. and that would be, to me, that would be indicative of the top of the tunnel. we did probe the logs that were there. in line with the projection it seemed hollow underneath. hit that one timber it\'s on hollow to me yeah and the hope is to extend the shaft to explore this further. it\'s exciting seeing round timbers down there. to me, round timbers are a great indication it\'s potentially old. you have to go back to the original story, right? 	CoOI S11E15.6
you have to go back to the original story, right? you know, logs every 10 feet in the money pit. logs, that\'s the description. it\'s an interesting possible connection. round timbers associated with the original construct of the money pit and round timber here. when i look back and think about reading the reader\'s digest article, it does bring your mind back to round logs in the original money pit, round logs in this feature. and so i don\'t have to believe that we\'re making progress and solving the mystery. i know we are. if we only saw square timbers down there, i think we\'re more into more modern searcher times. 	CoOI S11E15.6
if we only saw square timbers down there, i think we\'re more into more modern searcher times. so we\'ll just square off the excavation and we\'ll add another section on top. then we\'ll be ready to dig for another three feet and we\'ll be right on top of the structure. i mean, you can\'t help but let your mind go on this. after 15 years we may be just a few feet above original work. it could be it. it could be the thing. i am very excited that this is going to lead us to a treasure. yeah, it\'s gonna be, it can be quite a day when we set eyes on it completely. 	CoOI S11E15.6
yeah, it\'s gonna be, it can be quite a day when we set eyes on it completely. let\'s get it done. let\'s figure out what that tunnel represents, right? yeah. and where it\'s going. we\'re gonna find that hidden tunnel. it\'s right below us. i think we need to get out of there, wade. i think so. you guys stay safe down here, okay? okay. drop by. for rick and marty lagina, what began as a childhood dream may soon be fulfilled by a discovery that could rewrite history as we know it. to the ultimate answers of just who and what was behind the oak island mystery, lie at the end of a mysterious tunnel below the garden shaft. 	CoOI S11E15.6
oh, this is a perfect day to be in the swamp, isn\'t it? yeah. this is a deep part of the swamp here. yeah, it\'s complicated too. and that\'s exactly why you\'re here. to uncomplicate this for us. despite the ominous weather, as a new morning begins on oak island, the hope for a breakthrough discovery that could help solve a 229-year-old mystery remains far from dampened for brothers rick and marty lagina and their team as they continue investigating near the middle of the triangle-shaped swamp. bill, can you fill us in on what you\'ve seen here? what we\'re seeing is we have a high layer of stumps. 	CoOI S11E16.1
what we\'re seeing is we have a high layer of stumps. trees wouldn\'t grow that big unless the environment was somewhat dry. we could probably take a cut through there, a cut through here. we\'d probably find more. okay. it\'s a beautiful section to understand how this area developed. so why don\'t we see if we can expose one. all right, let\'s step back. that\'s a big stump. one week ago, while excavating in this deep region of the swamp:  it\'s all uneven like it was at the cut. members of the team uncovered several ax-cut tree stumps. if that broke off, the logs would be laying right there beside it, i think. 	CoOI S11E16.1
if that broke off, the logs would be laying right there beside it, i think. curiously, because trees are unable to grow naturally in swamp environments, these finds offered critical evidence to support the belief of geoscientist dr. ian spooner that the swamp could be an artificially made feature. there\'s your layer of stump there. and there\'s a big something. now, as the team unearths more potentially ancient stumps from the middle of the swamp, dr. spooner will collect samples for c-14 testing in order to hopefully determine just when this area of the swamp was created. so the question, i think, for me is whether or not those stumps stayed out the same as the paved area. 	CoOI S11E16.1
so the question, i think, for me is whether or not those stumps stayed out the same as the paved area. remember, we found wood that dated at 1,200 within the paved area. in recent years, the oak island team has uncovered numerous stone structures in the swamp. these include the potentially 500-year-old stone road and the stone walkway leading to a massive boulder in the southeast corner, as well as a massive paved area in the middle of the bog that dr. spooner was able to carbon date to approximately 1200 ad. these discoveries have made rick lagina believe that the oak island mystery may be connected to a generational conspiracy that was carried out in stages over a number of centuries. 	CoOI S11E16.1
oak island mystery may be connected to a generational conspiracy that was carried out in stages over a number of centuries. what happened here? obviously the stumps can be dated and hopefully those dates will align with the manmade constructs that we have found. stone roads, stone path, paved area, because we have retrieved dates from those. we need to do our homework and be patient. i think there are some answers here. if we get dates 1200 on those logs at the bottom, that would equate to the paved area. that means that there\'s a forest at this location at that time. 	CoOI S11E16.1
that means that there\'s a forest at this location at that time. so, yeah, at this stage, what we\'ve got to do is get dry weather to actually effectively sample this. yeah. well, all i know is good luck with the dry weather. yeah. we have a hurricane on the horizon and a bad weather this weekend. yeah. hurricane lee is on the near horizon heading towards nova scotia. no need of a hurricane visiting the island. the potential problems are quite extensive. we don\'t know how impactful it will be. will it be a category one, a tropical storm, category two, three, four? 	CoOI S11E16.1
will it be a category one, a tropical storm, category two, three, four? we\'ll have to wait and see. i\'m just going to grab my tools, get some sample bags so we can get these samples. yep. yeah, this will be very interesting to see what happens here. while dr. spooner collects his samples in the swamp. hey scott, little bit of excitement around here. yeah, so the boys have actually now found the wood that we\'re looking for. in the money pit area, scott barlow meets with roger fortin of dumas contracting limited for an update on an operation that the team hopes will soon lead them to a vast cache of buried treasure. 	CoOI S11E16.1
for an update on an operation that the team hopes will soon lead them to a vast cache of buried treasure. from the pictures i saw from ronnie, it looks like those timbers are pretty old. they\'re all rounded out. it really motivated the guys to say that once they saw that, they were just like tunnel rats down there. they were moving clay like you wouldn\'t believe. you get a visual on it. definitely would. you see the end. last week, after nearly two years of tireless effort, the team from dumas was finally able to extend the mid-18th century structure known as the garden shaft down to a depth of 95 feet, where they exposed the top of a bleak, seven-foot-high wooden tunnel. 	CoOI S11E16.1
the garden shaft down to a depth of 95 feet, where they exposed the top of a bleak, seven-foot-high wooden tunnel. a tunnel that runs due west into the so-called baby blob, where water testing in previously drilled boreholes has identified high traces of gold, silver, and other metals between 80 and 120 feet underground. in the coming days, the team will install one additional section or set to the base of the garden shaft to breach the tunnel and find out not only where it leads, but also what it might contain. this is all about anticipation. i mean, we\'re close. 	CoOI S11E16.1
this is all about anticipation. i mean, we\'re close. we have physical evidence that the tunnel is real. it\'s been a long process, almost two years worth of effort between the planning and the execution and ultimately the successful completion of the task at hand. now we need to understand its relevance to the mystery. we\'ve got a lot to learn from this tunnel. sounds good. see how it goes. who can have an anxious to get down there? alright. right on. don\'t you have to get up there? yeah. we\'ll talk to you later. as the operation continues in the garden shaft, later that afternoon. 	CoOI S11E16.1
yeah. we\'ll talk to you later. as the operation continues in the garden shaft, later that afternoon. good day. good day, sir. hello, dr. sutowsky. welcome to the war room. we really appreciate you coming to us and we look forward to what you have to say. thank you for having me. i\'m really happy to be here and share these exciting results with you today. yep, our pleasure. rick, marty, craig tester and other members of the team have gathered in the war room for a meeting via video conference with dr. spooner\'s colleague, geoscientist dr. aaron sutowsky. today we\'re going to learn about a new science and new data and the doctor was kind enough to run some analysis specifically about where certain artifacts came from. 	CoOI S11E16.1
science and new data and the doctor was kind enough to run some analysis specifically about where certain artifacts came from. exactly. over the past several years, between the team\'s core drilling operations and the installation of a number of large steel caissons all across the money pit area. they have recovered evidence of two potentially man-made chambers outside of the baby blob that also contain traces of precious metals. one is located some 180 feet deep in a large void between boreholes h-8 and rf1 where a possibly ancient pickaxe was also recovered and the other was found at a depth of approximately 150 feet which the team has dubbed aladdin\'s cave. 	CoOI S11E16.1
also recovered and the other was found at a depth of approximately 150 feet which the team has dubbed aladdin\'s cave. dr. sutowsky, please proceed. okay, so isotope tracer work is slightly more nuanced than other type of analyses that might be done. now, after conducting isotope testing on wood samples that were unearthed from these locations. dr. sutowsky has prepared a report that he believes could offer new clues to help the team solve the oak island mystery. the main isotopes that i wanted to focus on are the strontium and the oxygen isotope composition in the wood samples that you sent. 	CoOI S11E16.1
that i wanted to focus on are the strontium and the oxygen isotope composition in the wood samples that you sent. so strontium is a metallic element that can be used like a fingerprint in combination with oxygen to identify where objects come from in the world. wow. it\'s kind of interesting. yes. so if we look at the money pit samples, so these two samples, 0328 and 013, came from rf1. yeah, that\'s where it gets really interesting, because rf1, we still believe, was closest to the original money pit. yep. the next slide i have is the isotope values, so we can really look at the data. 	CoOI S11E16.1
yep. the next slide i have is the isotope values, so we can really look at the data. and what you can see is we\'re measuring oxygen and strontium in the wood samples that i\'ve plotted here. so these two wood samples, o328 and o13, they both plot in a very similar spot. these samples, i would argue, are the most interesting samples that we have. they plot furthest away from maritime canada and northern canada. so, our only option is europe. that\'s really interesting and baffling. so where do you think that sample comes from? southeastern france, northern italy, or, you know, coastal norway, in those areas, that\'s where it overlaps. 	CoOI S11E16.1
our only option is europe, southeast france, northern italy or you know, coastal norway and those areas that\'s where it overlaps. that sounds good enough to me. good enough? sounds very good. sounds remarkable. in the war room, geoscientist dr. aaron sutowsky has just shared a stunning scientific report that the wood recovered nearly 180 feet deep from borehole rf1 in the money pit area, likely originated in europe. a lot of old looking timber came out of that caisson. you know, it\'s really interesting to note that the areas that dr. sutowsky are giving us for the possible origin of these samples is southeastern france. 	CoOI S11E16.2
sutowsky are giving us for the possible origin of these samples is southeastern france. the idea that the mines where the lead for the lead cross came from, is in italy. i mean, we saw a lot in italy that we feel could relate to the oak island mystery. yes. when we went to viterbo, jean-luc had told us that a lot of holy relics came from jerusalem through italy, and then off to other regions like france. buongiorno. over the last decade, as rick, marty, craig and the team have been digging into both the ground and the past in their efforts to solve the oak island mystery. 	CoOI S11E16.2
the team have been digging into both the ground and the past in their efforts to solve the oak island mystery. they have visited numerous sites in both france and italy. hey guys, come take a look at this. that served as strongholds between the 12th and 14th centuries for the knights templar. it is the belief of numerous researchers that members of this medieval christian order were the ones who carried out a generational conspiracy to hide vast riches and priceless religious relics on oak island. hey rick, check this out. that\'s cool. we have seen this symbol before. a joe stone. 	CoOI S11E16.2
hey rick, check this out. that\'s cool. we have seen this symbol before. a joe stone. yeah. in addition to seeing many stone carvings on these journeys that were identical to symbols that have been found over the last two centuries by searchers on or near oak island, astonishingly in 2017. the team also unearthed a lead cross on the island itself, made from lead that was scientifically traced to a 14th century mine in southern france. those are really provocative locations considering everything we found on the island and everything we\'ve been researching. is it possible that the team has found more evidence right in the money pit area that the templar order really could be connected to the oak island mystery? 	CoOI S11E16.2
more evidence right in the money pit area that the templar order really could be connected to the oak island mystery? this has opened our minds to the possibilities of even revisiting the areas that these samples have been retrieved from, like rf-1. i think it puts a renewed interest in that location. yeah, back to back we go. we just need to go deeper. even though we\'re in the garden shaft, even though we\'re drilling around the 95 foot tunnel and the baby blob, this information is exceedingly important because you have incredibly interesting samples from rf1. and you have some clarity about where they might have come from. 	CoOI S11E16.2
and you have some clarity about where they might have come from. different geographic regions associated with templars. could it possibly reflect multiple treasure depositions? it may change the search agenda as we currently understand it. thank you and we look forward to our next communication. absolutely. i look forward to it. thank you. the following day as the operation to breach the possible treasure tunnel continues in the garden shaft. f175-8.25. that\'s what we expected. fast tail all the way down to 88 feet. more than 50 feet to the southwest. hey guys. we never did get to the bottom. 	CoOI S11E16.2
more than 50 feet to the southwest. hey guys. we never did get to the bottom. marty. hey marty. how you doing? what\'s going on today? well, we\'re trying to get to the bottom of rf-1. oh, okay. marty lagina joins other members of the team where a new borehole known as f175-8.25 is being drilled within the previously excavated 8 foot diameter rf-1 caisson in the hopes of finding additional clues and hopefully evidence of valuables. the key to this whole drill program or this endeavor is to get down and see what\'s between 205 and the bedrock. yes. the initial results drilling of the original rf-1 were very interesting. 	CoOI S11E16.2
yes. the initial results drilling of the original rf-1 were very interesting. all kinds of things that made me think at the time we were in the original money pit. but we did stop somewhat short of the bedrock. there\'s like 10 feet or 15 feet of material we never got to. so we\'re going to sort of re-drill rf1 to see what we might have missed with the canister. maybe this re-drilling rf1 would give us a place to put down a canister that goes even deeper. we need to find the best target because we are running out of the usual things. 	CoOI S11E16.2
we need to find the best target because we are running out of the usual things. money, time. so, okay, in place. steve, i know you have to go and i got some stuff to do too. we\'ll be back. okay, guys. thank you. see you later. as the core drilling operation proceeds in the money pit area, on lot 5, located near the shore on the western side of the island. we have a hurricane on the way, so let\'s try to get as much work done as we can, and then we\'ll see what we can do after the hurricane\'s passed. 	CoOI S11E16.2
to get as much work done as we can, and then we\'ll see what we can do after the hurricane\'s passed. gary! all right. metal detection expert gary drayton joins jack begley, jamie kuba, and fiona steele as they continue investigating the large foundation that was discovered earlier this year beneath a circular stone structure. we\'re trying to figure out why they brought deep money pit soil in and packed it into this portion of the wall. like at 104 feet down. that\'s crazy. yeah. since the team purchased lot 5 and began searching for clues in this feature one year ago, they have made astonishing discoveries that include metal tools and various kinds of pottery. 	CoOI S11E16.2
clues in this feature one year ago, they have made astonishing discoveries that include metal tools and various kinds of pottery. a lead barter token that is a compositional match to the 14th century lead cross. it reminds me of like a crude mortar or cement. and a man-made cement-like substance that has also been found approximately 100 feet deep around the tunnel below the garden shaft. gary is going to scan the rocks and spoils that have recently been removed from the feature and i got the big coil on so depth is not a problem in order to look for more clues as to how it might be connected to the money pen. 	CoOI S11E16.2
not a problem in order to look for more clues as to how it might be connected to the money pen. whoa, that sounds great. we have got an it right in the top hear jack. do you want me to dig it out or do you just want to pinpoint it? yeah, i\'ll try pinpointing it. that sounds really good. that is not iron, that\'s non-ferrous. let\'s see what we got. what we got waiting for us. yep, that\'s it in my hand. right in my hand. oh make sure that is it. yep and i see the edges of it mate. 	CoOI S11E16.2
oh, i see what it is, mate. oh, a nice little button. oh, wow, look at that. that is really, really nice. is that silver? i think it could be, mate. it\'s either silver or pewter. i mean, look at that. you can see the shine on it. oh, yeah. while metal detecting the spoils from the mysterious stone foundation on lot 5. that ain\'t copper alloy. no. metal detection expert gary drayton and jack begley have just unearthed a potentially important clue. that\'s a great find. yeah, that is sweet. mm-hmm. there\'s a chance this could be silver mate meaning treasure. 	CoOI S11E16.3
that\'s a great find. yeah, that is sweet. mm-hmm. there\'s a chance this could be silver mate meaning treasure. this is great and the thing is it\'s fancy. we find a lot of cuff buttons, especially around here, but none as fancy as this. this might have been an officer\'s button. based on it being a flat button, what period of time were flat buttons in use? mid 1600s all the way through into the early 1800s. that\'s brilliant. great find, gary. yeah, just here. all right, i\'ll bag it. i love the buttons. it\'s an oldie. this can still tell a story. 	CoOI S11E16.3
all right, i\'ll bag it. i love the buttons. it\'s an oldie. this can still tell a story. let\'s find some more artifacts, mate, because that was really, really cool. oh, we\'ve got another non-ferocity. that is gonna be something good. should be able to pinpoint it. i see something here, mate. oh, it\'s got a design on it. it does. it\'s three cannons. is it? it is. it\'s not. it\'s artillery. yes, it is. it\'s a cuff button and a military button, mate. can we see? yeah. come on over. ladies, come and check this out. think we got ourselves a military button. 	CoOI S11E16.3
can we see? yeah. come on over. ladies, come and check this out. think we got ourselves a military button. that was fast. look at this. this is special because it is artillery. that was on a uniform. as far as dating it, it\'s a flat button. so we\'re in the 1700s, maybe even older with this. yeah, that\'s absolutely correct. oh, here you go. wow. i\'m pretty sure it\'s three cannons, and then there\'s three dots along the base. sweet. i know artillery buttons were popular with the french, the british, and the spanish. that\'s awesome. this could tell us not only a who, but a when. 	CoOI S11E16.3
that\'s awesome. this could tell us not only a who, but a when. on not just who did work on lot 5, but who was deep down in the money pit, digging, i\'m thinking depositing something before the money pit discovery. and if the military was here, then this could change what the entire feature is understood as. i say we get this back, along with the other button back to the lab. see you soon. see you, gary. yay! great job. as the operations in the money pit area continue. emiliano, thank you for joining. yeah, yeah. dr. spooner has done a lot of work in the swamp off of the peninsula. 	CoOI S11E16.3
yeah, yeah. dr. spooner has done a lot of work in the swamp off of the peninsula. rick lagina has called a meeting with his brother, marty, and researchers, judy rudebush and emiliano zacchetti, who joins via video conference. here\'s some results. although he was unable to attend the meeting early this morning, dr. ian spooner presented rick with a carbon dating analysis that he conducted on the tree stumps that were recently found in the swamp. there appears to be two levels of stumps. this is fairly definitive. it\'s meaningful because the stumps were cut. and we believe, i certainly do, that human beings went in there and harvested the trees there because we find no logs, none. 	CoOI S11E16.3
believe, i certainly do, that human beings went in there and harvested the trees there because we find no logs, none. and all the stumps are roughly this high. so dr. spooner pulled a sample from one of the stumps at the lower level for c-14 analysis to determine when the tree was actually cut down and used. so here\'s some results from data analytics. 54.1%, 1346 to 1396, and 41%, 1296 to 1328. let\'s get wood from 178. well, that\'s deeper than normal. yes. so where did it come from? we\'ve got nothing but bad news. we\'re going to have to shut down. 	CoOI S11E16.3
64.1% 1346 to 1396. 14th century. and 41% 1296 to 1328. in the oak island research center, rick lagina has just revealed an astonishing c-14 report, which suggests that the axe-cut tree stump that was found in the middle of the triangle-shaped swamp could be more than 700 years old. this is meaningful if it came from a bona fide... it did. well, if it\'s from a cut stump, then somebody cut it. we\'re coming to believe that the swamp was artificially manipulated. and we know from dr. spooner\'s work on the paved area, that construct is 1200. rick, you\'ve come to the belief that there\'s been substantial periods of activity here, daisy-chaining each other with gaps. 	CoOI S11E16.4
rick, you\'ve come to the belief that there\'s been substantial periods of activity here, daisy-chaining each other with gaps. this would support that. this would very much so. i think it\'s appropriate at this point in time that we build off of what professor gaspani told us last year in terms of nolan\'s cross, right? one year ago, during their visit in italy to investigate possible connections between the medieval order of the knights templar and the oak island mystery, rick, along with members of the team and researcher emiliano zacchetti, met with archaeoastronomy expert professor adriano gaspani. the position where the star comes out changes in the centuries. 	CoOI S11E16.4
the position where the star comes out changes in the centuries. based on professor gaspani\'s more than three decades of expertise, the megalithic formation of six boulders on oak island, known as nolan\'s cross, was likely created centuries ago by positioning the massive boulders on the surface to align with specific stars in the night sky. and by studying the historic positions of those stars, professor gaspani was able to calculate the approximate date when the cross may have been created. the alignment of these stars bring an epoch of 1200 ad. we have professor gaspani\'s assessment that someone who\'s here in the 1200s building something. 	CoOI S11E16.4
we have professor gaspani\'s assessment that someone who\'s here in the 1200s building something. now we have other human activity that dates to the same time frame. it\'s very possible then that human beings were here. what is being understood by these processes is that the work in the swamp perhaps did start very, very early, i.e. 1200s. and if that is the point of beginning, it opens up the door to all kinds of possibilities in terms of theory and the who, what, when, where, why, and how things. there was a determined effort on the part of groups to conduct some enterprise here that it may have been done incrementally. 	CoOI S11E16.4
was a determined effort on the part of groups to conduct some enterprise here that it may have been done incrementally. it stretches the mind to think that something was that important to have been done over centuries. so in order to properly, i\'ll say, utilize professor gaspani\'s expertise and his knowledge, i think it\'s an imperative on our part that we expand upon that information. and one of the ways we can do that, in my opinion, is we know there are two other stone constructs on the island. the stone triangle and the stone cairns is what fred delineated on his map. 	CoOI S11E16.4
the stone triangle and the stone cairns is what fred delineated on his map. he called them pirate piles. in 1897, treasure hunters were astonished to discover an equilateral triangle composed of beach stones located on the south shore, which pointed due north toward the original money pit. while the feature\'s exact position was plotted on numerous surveys, unfortunately, it was later destroyed during the massive digging operations conducted by robert dunfield in 1965. however, the remnants of several other man-made stone features remain, nearly a half mile to the northeast on lot 15. first documented by fred nolan in the 1960s, the so-called stone cairns, or pirate piles, were five pyramid-shaped constructs that fred believed pointed directly toward the triangle-shaped swamp. 	CoOI S11E16.4
1960s, the so-called stone cairns, or pirate piles, were five pyramid-shaped constructs that fred believed pointed directly toward the triangle-shaped swamp. what\'s left up there? refresh my memory. very little. the features themselves, the bases of the features are there. i think we should provide professor gaspani with gps coordinates for the stone cairns and the stone triangle, and ask him, can you make any alignments to the stars? rick, i couldn\'t possibly agree more. i\'m wholly on board with this. let\'s do it. could rick\'s notion be correct? that if professor adriano gaspani analyzes the positions of the stone cairns and the stone triangle. 	CoOI S11E16.4
that if professor adriano gaspani analyzes the positions of the stone cairns and the stone triangle. that may be able to determine just when those features were originally created. so if you guys provide me some data, some measurements, i\'m more than happy to share it with professor gaspani as soon as i see him. we\'ll send you on the information asap. please thank him up front for all of his work to date and we look forward to continued interaction with him. that\'s great. thanks again. perfect. hi craig? no gold? not yet. in the money pit area, craig tester joins geologist terry matheson and oak island historian charles barkhouse as they continue monitoring the core drilling operation in borehole f175-8.25. 	CoOI S11E16.4
joins geologist terry matheson and oak island historian charles barkhouse as they continue monitoring the core drilling operation in borehole f175-8.25. how deep are we? we\'re down 178 so far. we hope to follow it all the way down to the bottom, craig. but we\'ve been in and out of a little bit of wood, and that wood we have right there, that came from 155 and a half to 157. right. yeah. and we did get a little bit of wood from 178, too. oh, that\'s deeper than normal. yes. so where did it come from? possible evidence of a wooden structure? 	CoOI S11E16.4
oh, that\'s deeper than normal. yes. so where did it come from? possible evidence of a wooden structure? unearthed at a depth of 178 feet? could it be related? to the wood sample previously recovered from this area, which originated in europe. if so, what else might they find as they drill deeper underground? hey pvc pipe. f175-8.25, down, 199. it\'s discouraging the idea that we\'re passing through an old borehole. unfortunately, the fact that the drill has encountered fragments of pvc pipe means that it has veered off target and into a previously drilled borehole. but just what did the drill hit that changed its course? 	CoOI S11E16.4
hey roger. hey, how\'s it going alex? good, good to see you again. before another productive day comes to an end on oak island. i think we\'re just coming down on the tunnel, right? well, exactly. alex lagina arrives in the money pit area for a progress uptake on the operation to extend the garden shaft into the possible treasure tunnel located more than 95 feet underground. so right now the shaft bottom is at 95 and we dug about 2.5 feet, so i\'d say 97-98 feet. so we just finished installing the staging in there to make it safer for the guys. 	CoOI S11E16.5
so we just finished installing the staging in there to make it safer for the guys. yep, that looks like part of the shoe going down now, is that right? that\'s right, yeah. so they\'ve got the two panels, the two end panels that go on the wall plates. we\'re going to add a shoe section to it. so what we\'re trying to do is stop anything from coming in. right. it\'s like building a ship in a bottle. yeah, it is. that\'s a good metaphor. in order to safely extend the garden shaft to the top of the mysterious tunnel, the team from dumas is constructing and installing a protective steel and wooden frame known as a shoe, which will secure the base of the structure into the earth around the tunnel and protect it from caving in. 	CoOI S11E16.5
shoe, which will secure the base of the structure into the earth around the tunnel and protect it from caving in. so we\'ve got a couple of days of just getting all that stuff done and then we\'ll be back into digging. the best case scenario is if the tunnel is open. yeah. it might lead us to the money pit and the treasure. i mean from the look of what i saw in that dibra, it looks pretty original. it looks old? oh yeah, it\'s definitely not something that came out of a mill. right, and all of it means we\'re a step closer to finally actually visually seeing some of these structures that have been underground for hundreds of years. 	CoOI S11E16.5
we\'re a step closer to finally actually visually seeing some of these structures that have been underground for hundreds of years. well, exactly. well, we\'re all anxious and we\'re all excited and we all appreciate the work you guys are doing. all right, absolutely. and i\'ll let you know as soon as i see something in there that looks like, okay guys, you need to come and see this. sounds good, perfect, thank you. right on. see you soon. absolutely, we\'ll talk to you later. thanks everybody for coming around the war room table today and we\'ve got nothing but bad news. 	CoOI S11E16.5
thanks everybody for coming around the war room table today and we\'ve got nothing but bad news. rick lagina has called an emergency war room meeting with members of the team. hurricane\'s coming, there\'s no denying it. the problem with hurricane lee that i see for the island is the speed that the storm is moving. in this storm the directions are going 360 degrees and wind right so everybody is going to feel a piece of it. 24 hours hurricane lee has rapidly intensified into a category 5 storm system with wind speeds that could exceed 150 miles per hour after already causing damage to bermuda and the northeastern united states it is now projected to reach the atlantic coast of nova scotia in the coming days bringing with it torrential rains flooding and potentially grave danger to the province. 	CoOI S11E16.5
coast of nova scotia in the coming days bringing with it torrential rains flooding and potentially grave danger to the province. so, and then we just cross our fingers and hope that, you know, all goes well, that we stay safe here and that everyone in the area stays safe. and if anybody in the local area needs help, you know, and they ask for help, they should know that we\'ll be there for them as well. yeah. so. we\'ve all been here during this storm before 2019. i think we all remember the waves breaking over the causeway. you\'re right. 	CoOI S11E16.5
i think we all remember the waves breaking over the causeway. you\'re right. yeah. there\'s no road under here. four years ago, hurricane dorian battered oak island and the surrounding areas, which severely damaged the causeway and structures across the island. with hurricane lee now fast approaching, the team is fearful of the damage it could cause, not only to the ancient structures in the swamp and on lot 5, but also to the garden shaft. this could be the most dangerous day on this island. yeah, exactly. the possible negative effects on the search agenda are quite extensive. this swamp will refill and we will be delayed. 	CoOI S11E16.5
the possible negative effects on the search agenda are quite extensive. this swamp will refill and we will be delayed. we know that there\'s been a problem with water intruding within the garden shaft. trees come down, power is lost. it affects everything. i don\'t know where to go with this discussion to be honest with you. i think pretty apparent. we\'re gonna have to shut down. we\'re gonna have to stop all the activities to keep everybody safe. i mean, they\'re shutting down each night when it might rain, and then this is completely different. this is the first time in war room history that i\'m gonna say this, and i don\'t want to be here. 	CoOI S11E16.5
i don\'t see anything helpful about hurricane lee. in the war room, rick lagina and other members of the team are regrettably planning to temporarily shut down all search operations on oak island. due to reports that hurricane lee, a category 5 storm system, will reach the eastern coast of nova scotia in a matter of days. bottom line is, first and foremost, everybody be safe. yes. the next thing that\'s paramount of course, making sure that we try to protect the work that\'s already been accomplished. keep all the infrastructure that\'s in place up and ready to function when the good weather comes back. 	CoOI S11E16.6
keep all the infrastructure that\'s in place up and ready to function when the good weather comes back. yeah. so laird, why don\'t we start with you? so you\'ll take care of your sites, all your tools, everything. yeah, exactly. all we can do is batten down our two sites with tarps so we can just protect them as much as we can, but there\'s very little we can do to prevent water getting in them. we\'re just gonna be eyes and boots, guys. you need us help. we\'re at your disposal to say, you go do this, you go do that. 	CoOI S11E16.6
you need us help. we\'re at your disposal to say, you go do this, you go do that. and roger, you\'re up next. what do you do? on our side, it\'s not so much the wind, it\'s the amount of rain. that rain, obviously, we\'re in a hole. water goes down the hole. so it\'s gonna be like niagara falls down there. we\'re gonna put the lids on. we don\'t want the water to fill up in the shaft and go up to a height that\'s maybe gonna cause us grief. and we\'ll have a couple of guys here keeping the water down, just pumping out every two hours, start the pumps and let the water go down. 	CoOI S11E16.6
guys here keeping the water down, just pumping out every two hours, start the pumps and let the water go down. you know, really, not much you can do about water and swamp. no. probably my biggest concern is for the island overall. we have a couple sections of the swamp road that are still narrow. so we have to make sure that those are shored up because we want to make sure that the ocean doesn\'t reach. no, the island doesn\'t take too much of a pounding because we don\'t want to continue to lose shoreline. but it\'s going to be the wind. 	CoOI S11E16.6
but it\'s going to be the wind. it\'s going to be a big thing here. so we\'ll cover the whole island, and we\'ll just go area by area. just one other thing from the big rain we had months ago. it washed out a lot of roads. this storm may wash them out again. so even if you\'re thinking about the island, you\'re driving here. there\'s a number of places where this road\'s been undercut and they can give out on you. so really watch out for that when you\'re coming back. yeah. if you don\'t need to be up during the storm, stay home. 	CoOI S11E16.6
yeah. if you don\'t need to be up during the storm, stay home. i guess we do have a full day ahead of us so we should get started. get some stuff done. sounds good. everybody stay safe. yes. there\'s no question that safety is paramount. you can\'t do anything about mother nature. what you can do is say, you know what? we\'re gonna deal with these issues and we\'re gonna keep moving forward. and that\'s what we intend to do. you can see this web of colors in the night. i\'d certainly been a top seat tour of the year. 	CoOI S11E16.6
you can see this web of colors in the night. i\'d certainly been a top seat tour of the year. bad luck happening right at the right time where it hampers your efforts. i don\'t believe in curses, but here we are in the garden shaft. maybe only feet above some real answers. alright guys, we\'re good to go! i don\'t know why mysterious setbacks seem to occur at very inopportune times, but they do. ah, it\'s just incredible, isn\'t it? and it seems to be when you\'re close to the treasures when it becomes really impossible. let\'s get going. for rick, marty, craig and their team, what\'s the way to do it? 	CoOI S11E16.6
thanks for watching! that\'s as strong as the wind as i\'ve ever been in. yeah. no wonder how the island did. that\'s what we\'re gonna figure out, right? mm-hmm. there\'s a potential that it\'s really quite bad. a new morning has dawned under a cloud of great concern for rick lacuna, his nephew alex, and jack begley as they make their way to oak island. well, the causeway\'s there. yeah, i know. it looks pretty good. 48 hours ago, a devastating storm known as hurricane lee reached the eastern coastline of nova scotia, causing torrential rains, flooding, and millions of dollars in damage to the province. 	CoOI S11E17.1
lee reached the eastern coastline of nova scotia, causing torrential rains, flooding, and millions of dollars in damage to the province. the swamp is full. yeah. that\'s a lot of water to pump out. that\'s a lot of water. speaking of that, i think we start to pump right now. look how deep it is. you\'d remember how deep those digs were. yeah. there\'s 34 feet of water in there. finding the swamp, which was drained several weeks ago, now nearly refilled with rain and sea water, is especially frustrating for the team. let\'s start the pumps. it means that they will have to spend the rest of the week pumping it dry and won\'t be able to explore critical areas, such as the region near the 800-year-old paved area that\'s gone, where just one week ago, they discovered axe-cut tree stumps that dated back to as early as the 14th century. 	CoOI S11E17.1
gone, where just one week ago, they discovered axe-cut tree stumps that dated back to as early as the 14th century. let\'s go check on the money pit. the storm has been very detrimental to the search agenda. looks okay. well, they\'re working. that\'s a good thing. mother nature has done what mother nature does, and thus we have to have patience and we will continue to move forward. good morning, roger. hey, how\'s it going, guys? so, what happened? it was rough with the hurricane, but little to no damage here. are you ready to start digging again today? oh yeah, for sure. 	CoOI S11E17.1
are you ready to start digging again today? oh yeah, for sure. we dug quite a bit yesterday. actually, we dug down to 99 feet. oh, well. the fact that the hurricane did not prevent representatives of duma\'s contracting limited from continuing to deepen the 18th century structure known as the garden shaft means that the team\'s most important operation of the year has thankfully not been interrupted. so is the tunnel exposed? so that\'s what we\'re planning on doing next. we\'re going to get in there and expose that that timber that\'s there. okay. in the coming days, dumas is hopeful that they will be able to fully expose a seven-foot-tall tunnel nearly 100 feet deep just below the garden shaft. 	CoOI S11E17.1
hopeful that they will be able to fully expose a seven-foot-tall tunnel nearly 100 feet deep just below the garden shaft. a tunnel that leads due west into the so-called baby blob, where high-trace evidence of precious metals has been detected in the groundwater between 80 and 120 feet underground. nothing detrimental happened to the garden shaft. we should be very grateful for that because now they can move seamlessly forward. that\'s why we\'re here. we\'re here to treasure it. we\'re here to solve a mystery. anyway, roger, we\'re glad that you stayed safe. your team stayed safe. you get to that wood, give us a call. 	CoOI S11E17.1
your team stayed safe. you get to that wood, give us a call. we\'ve got a lot of cleanup to do, so we\'re gonna get after it. good luck today. sounds good. take care, guys. later that afternoon. hey guys, ciao! so, i think this war room in particular might reflect what we have long sought to do. establish some sort of origination story to the oak island mystery. speak. in the war room, rick along with his brother marty, craig tester and other members of the team are meeting via video conference with argu astronomy expert, professor adriano gaspani. we have professor gaspani with us today. 	CoOI S11E17.1
we have professor gaspani with us today. we obviously have emiliano. and we have michael amadio, who is going to be the interpreter for professor gaspani. as you know, we met professor gaspani last year outside of rome. he quite literally shocked us with his interpretation of nolan\'s cross and its import here on the island. everything is just so well built. right. in 2022, rick and members of the team visited numerous sites in italy that once served as strongholds for the knights templar. the medieval order of warrior monks, who some believe made numerous visits to oak island in order to hide priceless religious treasures between the 12th and 17th centuries. 	CoOI S11E17.1
some believe made numerous visits to oak island in order to hide priceless religious treasures between the 12th and 17th centuries. hey rick, check this out. we have seen this symbol before. ho stone. yeah. during their visit, they not only saw a number of carved symbols that have been found over the years on and near oak island, but also met with professor gaspani regarding the megalithic formation of six boulders that were discovered in 1981 by fred nolan, known as nolan\'s cross. i find six stars, two million. according to professor gaspani, 40 years of expertise in the field of archaeoastronomy, the boulders in nolan\'s cross were positioned on oak island to align with certain stars in the night sky. 	CoOI S11E17.1
of archaeoastronomy, the boulders in nolan\'s cross were positioned on oak island to align with certain stars in the night sky. and furthermore, by studying the historic positions of those stars, he was able to determine the approximate time period that it was created. the alignment of these stars bring an epoch of 1200 ad. we have tasked professor gaspani with looking at the research with new information and new perspective. yes, some of the additional information we sent to professor gaspani to consider were the location of the stone piles on lot 15 and the stone triangle to see if there\'s any astronomical relevance to those as well. 	CoOI S11E17.1
the stone piles on lot 15 and the stone triangle to see if there\'s any astronomical relevance to those as well. mm-hmm. now, after being given the coordinates of other megalithic stone formations that have been discovered during the past two centuries on oak island, including the remains of five stone piles located on lot 15 that were shaped like pyramids and which were first documented by fred nolan back in the 1960s, and the stone triangle, which was unfortunately destroyed by searcher activities in 1965. professor gaspani has prepared a report on their possible origins as well. i turn it over to professor gaspani. 	CoOI S11E17.1
professor gaspani has prepared a report on their possible origins as well. i turn it over to professor gaspani. i\'m quite excited to listen to what he has to tell us. perfecto. what you see are the stones that constitute the nolan cross, which was formed in 1200 ad. right. now, near the nolan cross there is another configuration, the one called stone piles. these also have astronomical alignments. so, here you see the sun rising at the equinoxes. and here we have the surprise, points of rise and re-mounting of the moon that are reached only once every 18 years and a half. 	CoOI S11E17.1
the surprise, points of rise and re-mounting of the moon that are reached only once every 18 years and a half. similar to nolan\'s cross, it is professor gaspani\'s belief that the positions of the five stone piles on lot 15 were constructed long ago, according to alignments with specific stars, including the sun, as well as the position of the moon in the night sky. and thus, by calculating how long ago the positions of the piles perfectly aligned with those stars in relation to the position of the moon he can approximate when the piles were created. and with the probability at about 100%, since there are so many elements, the stone piles were placed on the ground at 1250 ad. 	CoOI S11E17.1
in conclusion, the nolan\'s cross is from 1200. the stone piles are from 1250. it\'s incredible. in the war room, archaeoastronomy expert professor adriano gaspani has just presented the oak island team with an astonishing scientific report. he believes that nolan\'s cross and the five stone piles, or cairns, located on lot 15 were possibly created by the same group of people nearly 800 years ago. there is a level of certainty a level of coincidence which is incredible okay this time only on the documentation. these are the alignment of the stones. in this triangle we have two directions, two astronomical lines. 	CoOI S11E17.2
these are the alignment of the stones. in this triangle we have two directions, two astronomical lines. the one that corresponds to the sunrise of the sun, the sunset, winter, sunset, sunset, winter, and then the same day. who knew these systems? it was a navigator and therefore that was known to astronomy and geometry. right. so, can the professor speculate as to the people who constructed it? but, if you could speculate in some way... the interesting thing is that if we imagine a scenario on the island, from 1200 to 1300, there was people, there was someone coming from europe, which has codified a message by having astronomical and significant stones. 	CoOI S11E17.2
1300, there was people, there was someone coming from europe, which has codified a message by having astronomical and significant stones. these knowledge were not those of the common people, knowledge spread in the religious monastic and also that of the so, in my opinion, the most likely authors belonged to the templar order. there is intelligent design to this it seems. the templar order? could professor gaspani be correct? would that explain why the team has seen numerous carvings in former templar strong holds across europe that have also been found on oak island. might it explain who created the paved area in the swamp in addition to nolan\'s cross, the stone cairns on lot 15 and the stone triangle. 	CoOI S11E17.2
the paved area in the swamp in addition to nolan\'s cross, the stone cairns on lot 15 and the stone triangle. and finally, could it also identify who was responsible for the high trace evidence of gold, silver and other metals that had been detected in the money pit area? i think if dr. gaspani is correct, it turns the oak island history on its ear. it may even turn history as it\'s understood in terms of european contact on its ear in the maritimes for sure. the message is a secret it\'s not for everybody to know the conclusion is they were made by the templars. 	CoOI S11E17.2
the message is a secret it\'s not for everybody to know the conclusion is they were made by the templars. there are many strange things on that island. that\'s a fact. the amazing thing is that it was constructed by europeans. the level of certainty he has put to it is amazing. i\'ve always believed in the importance of nolan\'s cross, but now we have to come to a complete and understanding of the stone carins, what the stone triangle represents. so we need to get busy. yeah. professor gaspani, i have to say thank you very much. it\'s an incredible presentation and we may have some follow-up questions after we have time to think about it a little bit. 	CoOI S11E17.2
an incredible presentation and we may have some follow-up questions after we have time to think about it a little bit. okay, grazie. morning as restoration efforts continue across the island. we\'re going to, we\'re out right here charles. bed rock is going to be about 210, 215 feet below grade. in the money pit area, charles barkhouse joins geologist terry matheson to supervise a new core drilling operation in borehole f.25, 8.25, located 55 feet southwest of the garden shaft. we\'re very close to rf-1, and that\'s the reason why we\'re drilling this hole, because we have found such interesting artifacts in rf-1. 	CoOI S11E17.2
close to rf-1, and that\'s the reason why we\'re drilling this hole, because we have found such interesting artifacts in rf-1. yeah. so it\'s very interesting. look at all the wood. that is spectacular. that\'s cool. in 2019, the team first excavated an eight-foot wide steel caisson in this area, known as rf-1. incredibly below a depth of 100 feet. they unearthed the handle of a pickaxe as well as massive wooden timbers that just one week ago were scientifically proven to have originated in europe. so this is a very interesting area and hopefully we can find something else, so yeah. 	CoOI S11E17.2
so this is a very interesting area and hopefully we can find something else, so yeah. now, because recent water testing in this area has also yielded high traces of gold and silver below a depth of 150 feet, the team is hoping to find more evidence of man-made workings and ultimately the source of the precious metals that have been detected deep underground. thank you my friend. what have we got? ac filler grade. here we go charles. yep. i think that\'s going to be it. looks like they blocked on our cobble. this is all the recovery we have. 	CoOI S11E17.2
looks like they blocked on our cobble. this is all the recovery we have. not so much to write home about here charles. very early days, yep. we\'ve got quite a ways to go. the drilling operation continues in the money pit area. some 200 yards to the northwest on lot 15. this is an important area for us, mate. metal detection expert gary drayton and jack begley arrive at the site of the stone cairns. it\'s become really important due to professor gaspani\'s work. we\'re looking for anything that could allude to that 1213 hundreds visit. yeah, well now you\'re in my wheelhouse, mate. 	CoOI S11E17.2
we\'re looking for anything that could allude to that 1213 hundreds visit. yeah, well now you\'re in my wheelhouse, mate. i\'m from england. i search for medieval treasure. you ready to get stuck in? let\'s get started. okay. when these five stone formations were first surveyed by fred nolan in the 1960s, they were described as pyramid shaped and stood between five and seven feet high. however, since then, searcher activities caused them to be partially dismantled. first flag here. all right, right next to these stones. great sounding signal. just there mate. hey. is this one of the piles or something? 	CoOI S11E17.2
oh, is that a bit of lead? yeah, a bit of lead. it\'s like a lead strip. on lot 15, located several hundred feet northwest of the money pit area. now this is interesting. yeah, that is. gary drayton and jack begley have just found a potentially important clue near the believed 750-year-old stone cairns. this is fantastic, mate. it\'s shaped. could be very, very interesting, mate, because it looks decorated. and it was made like that on purpose. this is the potential to be medieval. you think it\'s medieval? yeah. honestly. yeah, i really do, mate. when i\'m working medieval sites in england with the metal detector, you find a lot of old iron and a lot of old lead. 	CoOI S11E17.3
medieval sites in england with the metal detector, you find a lot of old iron and a lot of old lead. and then if you look here, you find the medieval silver and gold. i think we\'ve just scored a really great find on lot 15. right next to these old stone piles. this might link back somehow to help prove professor gaspani\'s work. the so-called medieval period was an era of european history that lasted from roughly 500 to 1500 ad. could gary drayton be correct that this lead artifact may be more than 600 years old? if so, might it offer hard evidence that professor adriano gaspani\'s belief that the stone piles or cairns were created in the 13th century is true. 	CoOI S11E17.3
hard evidence that professor adriano gaspani\'s belief that the stone piles or cairns were created in the 13th century is true. this is fantastic, man. i can\'t wait to see the data on this. i think we should take it straight to the lab. yep, i\'m with you, mate. sweet find, gary. good thinking, mate. while gary and jack finish their search on lot 15. hey, roger. how\'s it going, scott? good. you\'ve uncovered some wood down there now. yeah, so roger just gave me a call not too long ago, and yeah, he\'s uncovered quite a bit of wood actually. 	CoOI S11E17.3
so roger just gave me a call not too long ago, and yeah, he\'s uncovered quite a bit of wood actually. operations manager scott barlow meets with roger fortin in the money pit area. after being informed that representatives from duma\'s contracting limited have finally uncovered a large section of the believed treasure tunnel, located just below the garden shaft at a depth of some 100 feet underground. this is exciting. this is what we\'ve been waiting for. absolutely, and that\'s why i told rod you stop, and i know before we start excavating, i want to make sure nothing gets damaged, that we don\'t go at it nice and easy and preserve every little piece that\'s in there. 	CoOI S11E17.3
sure nothing gets damaged, that we don\'t go at it nice and easy and preserve every little piece that\'s in there. that\'s a big day in oak island. oh, absolutely, absolutely. very few people have had this opportunity and were fortunate enough to be unearthing a very old tunnel, potentially a depositor tunnel. this is exciting. oh yeah. let\'s go down and have a look. sounds good, grab it out of the hole. working with the guys from dumas, i mean it\'s a privilege. they\'re hardworking guys, you know, they\'re miners. it\'s backbreaking work. they\'re down there, they\'re on their hands and their knees, they\'re chipping, they\'re digging, they\'re doing whatever it takes to move this material. 	CoOI S11E17.3
there, they\'re on their hands and their knees, they\'re chipping, they\'re digging, they\'re doing whatever it takes to move this material. the great thing about it is, they\'re just as excited as we are for this project. they want to put their hands and their eyes on this tunnel. they want to see what we want to see. tally, you want to come take a closer look? yeah, that\'s impressive structure. look at the size of those planks. yes, those beams. yeah, all lots of different sizes. yeah. oh wow look the size of those. i mean we can get some great information from that. 	CoOI S11E17.3
yeah. oh wow look the size of those. i mean we can get some great information from that. that\'s gonna be it you know 12 or 14 inches across. yeah it\'s pretty exciting moment to be down there to put eyes on this wood that you know nobody\'s seen for potentially upwards of 400 years pretty incredible when we see this rounded edge here like that looks like it may even have bark on us the log, you look at the size of that. that rounded is an outside edge and we can see the center in there. there\'s a lot of rings in there, which is great. 	CoOI S11E17.3
there\'s a lot of rings in there, which is great. that\'s a good indicator that\'s old growth. a possibly older rounded timber found nearly 100 feet underground in the garden shaft. in 1804, when treasure hunters began the first major excavation of the money pit, they reported finding a series of platforms made of round logs every 10 feet down to the 90 foot level. is it possible that this tunnel may be connected to the original treasure shaft? if so, just what might the team find at the end of it? i can\'t wait to get this uncovered and get some of this material out of here. 	CoOI S11E17.3
i can\'t wait to get this uncovered and get some of this material out of here. yeah, you and i both. we might be able to slide that plank right out of there. boy, you can tell there\'s like, say you got a piece here, a piece there, a piece here. i think that tunnel would be probably no more than five feet wide. there\'s kind of like wedges. they can take that wedge off right there. just give it a try. yep. this looks like it\'s loose, scott. we can pry that right off. yep. there we go. look at that. 	CoOI S11E17.3
yep. this looks like it\'s loose, scott. we can pry that right off. yep. there we go. look at that. definitely a witch. looks like bark there as well. you don\'t get more homemade witch than that. this is pretty exciting. we should let rick know that we\'re on this and starting to remove some stuff. for sure he\'s going to be excited to put eyes on this. i\'ve been in a lot of old mines, never seen this. let\'s keep digging. sounds good. coming up. what you got adam? 171. we\'ve got wood here, terry. we could maybe be in your original money pit. 	CoOI S11E17.3
all set? all set, i\'ll hold the ladder for you. coming down. it is an extraordinary moment for rick lagina, having been alerted that a large section of the possible treasure tunnel, located just beneath the garden shaft, at a depth of some 100 feet, has been exposed. look at that, right there. wow, those are big beams. they are. yeah. and no two are the same. that\'s impressive. we get down there and realize that there is hard evidence that the tunnel is not an interpretation. it\'s real. you get a little bit of chills. now we need to understand its relevance to the mystery. 	CoOI S11E17.4
it\'s real. you get a little bit of chills. now we need to understand its relevance to the mystery. oh, i\'d love to get one of those as well. well, what we\'re going to do is clean some of it up and then we\'re going to try and get a whole length out. and i think it would be nice to get that one. yeah. and then this one here we know is good and wide. yep. this one is definitely rounded here. this is much thinner, eh? and that could be an upright piece. it\'s cool, it\'s very cool. especially given the c-14 results. 	CoOI S11E17.4
and that could be an upright piece. it\'s cool, it\'s very cool. especially given the c-14 results. so that\'s why it\'s imperative that we get samples. it is. the whole idea of what happened in the money pit, you know, we have a timeline. earlier this year, wood samples from this tunnel, which the team obtained during a core drilling operation, were carbon dated to the 17th century. you want to get that piece out whole. yeah, absolutely. but now that much more of the structure has been revealed, the team will remove some of the massive beams for additional testing in the hopes of confirming just when this tunnel was created. 	CoOI S11E17.4
will remove some of the massive beams for additional testing in the hopes of confirming just when this tunnel was created. it\'s a year of pivotal moments. timber there. i think professor gaspani\'s work is pivotal. this recovery of these timbers may be a pivotal moment if it represents original work. this is important. what i\'d like to see happen here is these three timbers right here, even the fourth one being the one on top, get one pulled out so we can see a whole length. absolutely, we can get that done for you. great. if this is original depositor, there\'s a good chance there may be treasure at the end of this tunnel. 	CoOI S11E17.4
great. if this is original depositor, there\'s a good chance there may be treasure at the end of this tunnel. yep. i also want to get steve guptil down here and survey this. yes. great. i wonder, just, you know, how gary comes out, scan that real quick. yep, absolutely. so anyway, we will let you get started. and we\'ll get up and on your way. my thought was, you know, to have gary come down. i mean, why not? it is a treasure hunt after all, and we have exposed new area for him to investigate. ready, gary? yep. ready, mike. 	CoOI S11E17.4
ready, gary? yep. ready, mike. and hope that we find a artifact or artifacts that can be associated with cultural context as it relates to the construct. how freaking awesome is this? it\'s pretty great. we got everything we need, gary. thanks, mate. time to unleash the beast. you guys ready to find some treasure? find some treasure. let\'s strike up a magic wand. right. see if there\'s any metals in it. and unfortunately, i can\'t get too close to this iron. well, fortunately no wits, but we ain\'t finished yet, mate. if you can hang on to my detector, i\'m gonna try pinpointing. 	CoOI S11E17.4
if you can hang on to my detector, i\'m gonna try pinpointing. oh, you\'ve got it. it\'s in me hand. let\'s see what we got. it is this. what is it? i can\'t tell what it is. i\'m not getting a rapid vibration off it, which would tell me it\'s iron. so this is going to go back to the lab. and hopefully emma\'s got some great news about this. alright. good find, gary. yeah. right. let\'s see what we\'ve got here. fingers crossed. here, you\'ve got another hit. yep. what have we got here? yeah, we have got a piece of metal. 	CoOI S11E17.4
here, you\'ve got another hit. yep. what have we got here? yeah, we have got a piece of metal. look, it\'s shaped. see that flat edge on it? it\'s an interesting shape, for sure. have you seen anything like this from your operation? this is nothing we would use. so it\'s probably from the tunnel construction. yeah. we need more curious now. yeah, it really is. could gary be correct that this metal artifact may have been used in the construction of the tunnel. fantastic news. if so, could it be another critical clue that could help the team determine just when it was built? 	CoOI S11E17.4
if so, could it be another critical clue that could help the team determine just when it was built? all right, chaps, i\'m going to put this in the front pocket there and zip it. do you want me to help you do some measurements, mate? i wouldn\'t mind. for the first time, i can put survey control points on this tunnel. and this is going to help me draft and project this tunnel accurately now, because this is the first time we\'ve stood on it. so. ok, mate. i think it\'s great we\'re doing this steve for good measure. while steve and gary complete their survey of the tunnel beneath the garden shaft. 	CoOI S11E17.4
while steve and gary complete their survey of the tunnel beneath the garden shaft. i think we have a core coming up now. some 50 feet to the southwest. what we got adam? 51. 151. geologist terry matheson and oak island historian charles barkhouse are continuing to monitor the core drilling operation in borehole f.25, 8.25. thank you adam. a borehole where they hope to find more evidence of another man-made structure more than 150 feet deep scalpel that according to recent scientific testing is of european origin. let\'s slash this open take a look we\'ve got wood here, terry. what? 	CoOI S11E17.4
let\'s slash this open take a look we\'ve got wood here, terry. what? we\'ve got wood. this is all undisturbed here, so we must be right at the edge of something. you know terry, the fact that we\'re finding wood at this depth, we could maybe be in the original money pit. it\'s all the more important to get that sampled. absolutely. it\'s what we did, right? yeah. well, we got another core coming. hopefully we\'ll pull up some of that real treasure. yeah. what you got, adam? 171. oh, looks like we\'re into a bedrock. yep. on the side of the bedrock. 	CoOI S11E17.4
yeah. what you got, adam? 171. oh, looks like we\'re into a bedrock. yep. on the side of the bedrock. yep. here\'s some more of that punky, relatively soft material. much harder chips and bedrock here. yep. this stuff is just as mother nature left it. it is an unfortunate revelation for charles and terry that the drilling operation has reached bedrock at a depth of some 170 feet. however, since they recovered evidence of a wooden structure less than 20 feet higher and have also detected precious metals in this area, could it be that they just missed direct contact with something of great importance or value? 	CoOI S11E17.4
precious metals in this area, could it be that they just missed direct contact with something of great importance or value? we are in and out of old workings, something went on down there. let\'s clear this table. hopefully have another target to drill on. there\'s still a lot of areas where we haven\'t drilled. absolutely. we\'ll move on. mystery abounds on oak island. it certainly does. coming up. so i am very interested given this item being found in such close proximity to the stone cairns. is it a match for other artifacts we found on the island? yes. oh. 	CoOI S11E17.4
an exciting new day begins on oak island. all right, guys, if you\'re ready, we\'re gonna get this wood up. okay, let\'s do it. rick lagina and other members of the team arrive in the money pit area as massive timbers from the potential treasure tunnel located some 100 feet underground are about to be removed from the garden shaft. all right, jeremy, let\'s get her up here. we\'ve never had this opportunity before and we need to make certain we do everything we can to understand what this represents. here it comes right here. i absolutely hope that this leads us five steps closer to solving the mystery. 	CoOI S11E17.5
here it comes right here. i absolutely hope that this leads us five steps closer to solving the mystery. no, not quite. now i do. you can see in that piece of wood a man down there cutting that timber, creating that tunnel to go somewhere, hopefully to hide treasure. look at that, we get a rounded edge here and rounded on this side. yeah. and that\'s good. yeah, that\'s an adze cut. a timber cut with an adze? dating back to the days of ancient egypt, an adze was a type of cutting tool designed for the construction of ships and wood structures until the 18th century, when they were replaced by mechanized tools. 	CoOI S11E17.5
tool designed for the construction of ships and wood structures until the 18th century, when they were replaced by mechanized tools. that\'s a bit of oak island money pit history right here. so now, the question is just how long before the 18th century might this tunnel have been created? put your fingers. it\'s a real aha moment. there\'s no question about it. after all the struggles and all the setbacks and all the time and all the effort to see it there in front of you, this is real history and i wanna hold it in my hand. this has more going for it than anything else so far. 	CoOI S11E17.5
this has more going for it than anything else so far. this could lead right to the treasure. we don\'t know yet. let me just test it, see if it\'s sturdy enough for a gold dance. yeah, it will be. the good news is we still do have the horizontal drill. it\'s still to come. yeah, because the tunnel must be more fully exposed and inspected before the team can possibly access it. in the coming days, representatives from duma\'s contracting limited will conduct a probe drilling operation from the bottom of the garden shaft into the tunnel\'s interior to hopefully pinpoint the source of the precious metals that have been detected nearby in the baby blob. 	CoOI S11E17.5
the tunnel\'s interior to hopefully pinpoint the source of the precious metals that have been detected nearby in the baby blob. kudos to everybody, especially the guys down hall, because they did the work. let\'s stay the course, get as much information as we can. yeah. yeah. so it\'s been a very good day. while the operation continues in the garden shaft. later that afternoon. hey, laird. emma. hey. hey. rick, his nephew alex, and doug kroll join archaeologist laird niven and archeometallurgist emma culligan in the oak island laboratory. so i see this artifact that was found on lot 15. 	CoOI S11E17.5
so i see this artifact that was found on lot 15. was it found close to the stone carapace? yes. they are eager to hear emma\'s scientific analysis of the decorative lead artifact that was found just one day ago near the potentially 750 year old stone cairns located on lot 15. is it a match for any other lead artifacts we found on the island? so because it\'s lead, i can\'t give 100% confirmation of a match, but 99%, which is still pretty good. it matched a lot with an artifact from 2021. a twisted lead rod, which i do have here in the lab. 	CoOI S11E17.5
a twisted lead rod, which i do have here in the lab. that was the piece chris mcbarland found to hit as being possibly from a scandinavian origin. there we go. two years ago, while searching lot 13 between the swamp and the money pit. what the heck? that\'s lead! gary drayton and peter fernetti found a lead artifact with a decorative spiral design. this is the data for the twisted rod? an artifact that surprised geochemist dr. chris mcfarland after he conducted a form of isotope testing on it known as laser ablation. when we run the results through the database, one source would be in eastern scandinavia. 	CoOI S11E17.5
when we run the results through the database, one source would be in eastern scandinavia. here it is right here. in lot 13, where this twisted lid was found, that\'s just downhill from lot 15. professor gaspani posited this idea that those stone carins were placed there in the 1200s, so any and all metal artifacts whether they\'re precious metal or not, could play a part in identifying who was there possibly in that time period. so yeah, i think we\'re on a record. yep. and given this item being found in such close proximity to the stone currents, i think we have to follow up on that, a possible scandinavian connection to the island. 	CoOI S11E17.5
i think we have to follow up on the possible scandinavian connection to the island. in the oak island laboratory, rick lagina and members of the team have just found out that a lead artifact unearthed just one day ago on lot 15 near the stone cairns is a near compositional match to the lead object that was found two years ago on lot 13 and may have come from scandinavia. it\'s certainly probable if not definitive that this is not a north american mystery, i.e. it wasn\'t originated here. it had to have come from the old world. in years past, we\'ve investigated the possibility that the knights templar were behind this mystery. 	CoOI S11E17.6
in years past, we\'ve investigated the possibility that the knights templar were behind this mystery. the only people that we know of for sure that made the voyage pre-columbian are the norse. the historical record and some science puts the norse along these shores, like lanzarote the great. where else they were, there\'s another question. and we also know that the templars grew at the height of their power in the same time period. so did they know each other? it is well documented that the scandinavian warrior civilization, known as the norse, or vikings, explored and established settlements on the north american continent, including iceland, greenland, and new brunswick, as much as 1,000 years ago. 	CoOI S11E17.6
explored and established settlements on the north american continent, including iceland, greenland, and new brunswick, as much as 1,000 years ago. but could doug\'s idea that the vikings may have possibly been connected to the knights templar as well as the oak island mystery have any basis in reality? i think it\'s imperative to follow up on that research. if so, could that explain how structures like the paved area in the swamp, the stone cairns on lot 15, and these lead artifacts came to be on oak island? could that also explain the man-made workings that were recovered from deep in the rf-1 caisson and which are potentially of scandinavian origin as well as the traces of gold and silver that have been detected in the money pit area. 	CoOI S11E17.6
of scandinavian origin as well as the traces of gold and silver that have been detected in the money pit area. i\'ve always said it\'s a wonderful mystery and that\'s why it\'s complex and that\'s why it\'s interesting and that\'s why it continues to puzzle. so when you take items like this, you have to find the context. you know, you have to find the one thing. and you only need one. one that connects the norse, perhaps norse, templar connection to those constructs up on that hill. now with what we\'re finding and what professor gaspani is suggesting, your one thing might be found outside the money pit. 	CoOI S11E17.6
now with what we\'re finding and what professor gaspani is suggesting, your one thing might be found outside the money pit. we just have to find it. emma, laird again, thank you both very much. i think we\'ve got some homework to do. let\'s get after it. all right. thank you. thanks. another historic week on oak island has come to an end. and like many others in recent years, it may have revealed another chapter in a mystery that now appears to stretch back further in time and to further regions of the globe than anyone ever dreamed possible. as rick, marty and the team continue to dig, just what will they find? 	CoOI S11E17.6
hey guys. hey. hey. hey guys. i can\'t wait to show you guys this. let\'s flip the plastic off. we\'ll show these guys what we\'ve got. it\'s amazing what you guys managed to get out of the garden shaft there. yeah. it is the beginning of another hopeful week on oak island for brothers rick and marty lagina and their team as they continue a quest to solve a 229 year old mystery. we did a lot of work to get these timbers out of there. first thing i\'m going to say is this is the strangest thing that i think we ever could have encountered down there. 	CoOI S11E18.1
thing i\'m going to say is this is the strangest thing that i think we ever could have encountered down there. we cannot find any sign of walls or ceiling. however, in the money pit area, what appeared just a few days ago to be a major discovery some 100 feet deep at the bottom of the 18th century structure known as the garden shaft has only left them with more questions. it\'s strange. it seems to be collapsed, so who knows what happened down there. wow, those are big beams. last week, after nearly two years of tireless work, representatives from dumas contracting limited were finally able to expose what the team believed to be a seven-foot high wooden tunnel. 	CoOI S11E18.1
representatives from dumas contracting limited were finally able to expose what the team believed to be a seven-foot high wooden tunnel. if this is original depositor, there\'s a good chance that there may be treasure at the end of this tunnel. a tunnel that the team had previously drilled through on several occasions and determined that it ran due west into the so-called baby blob where high trace evidence of precious metals had been detected between 80 and 120 feet underground. and everyone that we pulled out we did a visual look underneath to see if we could see the wall timbers hanging down it was nothing it\'s like somebody just removed them and left the floor intact. 	CoOI S11E18.1
could see the wall timbers hanging down it was nothing it\'s like somebody just removed them and left the floor intact. however, after removing a number of large hand-cut wooden timbers, as well as two iron artifacts, the team was stunned to realize that the section of the tunnel that they exposed beneath the garden shaft has either collapsed or was partially dismantled sometime in the past. we found part of a tunnel, but the rest of the tunnel is missing, so that\'s disconcerting. but i think we could learn a lot from these pieces of wood because this could really be the first time we found a depositor tunnel underground. 	CoOI S11E18.1
a lot from these pieces of wood because this could really be the first time we found a depositor tunnel underground. and if it is original works, where was it going and why? and as you can see, there\'s some beautiful hand-wrought square nails there. oh yeah. so this one here is loose. you can see the head right here. now, while dumas works to uncover more of the mysterious tunnel in the hopes of finding an intact structure that may lead to the source of the valuables that have been detected nearby. there you go. look at that. the team will be carbon dating the wood timbers and analyzing metal fasteners found inside of them in an attempt to confirm that it was built prior to the discovery of the original money pit in 1795. 	CoOI S11E18.1
them in an attempt to confirm that it was built prior to the discovery of the original money pit in 1795. what do you think of that laird? oh yeah, that\'s what i\'d want to see. yeah, the hand-wrought nails. it\'s a rose head. see how nice and slim it is? i would put that in the 1600s, 1700s. you gotta admit, this is one of the most promising finds we\'ve had so far on the island. it is exciting. it feels like we\'re getting closer. it is a total collapse feature and we were hoping there would be evidence that it was partially open. 	CoOI S11E18.1
it is a total collapse feature and we were hoping there would be evidence that it was partially open. all information underground in the money pit is incredibly valuable information. so, i absolutely hope that this leads us to finding the treasure. let\'s learn as much as we can from the items that we have retrieved at depth. look, kudos to everyone. this might be a pivotal moment in the okan and treasure hunt. so, the nails, i think we should pull all of them. boards as well, take multiple samples, set them aside. there\'s a lot of work to do, so let\'s get going. 	CoOI S11E18.1
boards as well, take multiple samples, set them aside. there\'s a lot of work to do, so let\'s get going. sounds good. alright. while the operation continues in the money pit area, later that afternoon. hello guys. how are you? so, gentlemen, we have a guest today, dr. doug simmons. rick and marty have gathered members of the team in the war room to hear a highly anticipated presentation from dr. doug simmons, a retired professor of psychology from acadia university. i find it very intriguing about the possibility of viking-templar connections. doug, if you want to give us a little background and then... 	CoOI S11E18.1
doug, if you want to give us a little background and then... sure. dr. simmons and i met through dr. spooner, actually. we had discussions in the evenings over those provocative dates in the swamp of around 1200 a.d. and the stone piles on lot 15 were likely created after nolan\'s cross. yeah. one week ago, italian archaeoastronomer professor adriano gaspani presented the team with his scientific analysis and belief that the megalithic stone formations, which have been found on the surface of oak island, known as nolan\'s cross. the stone triangle and five stone piles located on lot 15 were all constructed in the 13th century by members of the knights templar. 	CoOI S11E18.1
and five stone piles located on lot 15 were all constructed in the 13th century by members of the knights templar. and curiously, in recent years, the team has found two lead artifacts that have been scientifically traced to scandinavia. dr. simmons has delved deeply into that subject. now, based on these findings, doug kroll has reached out to dr. doug simmons, who published his research in may of 2020, suggesting that the templar order and the medieval scandinavian culture, known as the norse or vikings, may both be connected to the oak island mystery. so, dr. simmons, if you\'d be so kind. 	CoOI S11E18.1
so, dr. simmons, if you\'d be so kind. thank you. so i became interested in european voyages that could account for these oak island finds. you\'ve got nolan\'s cross and also the swamp itself dates back to 1200 ad or so. and my research took me to this time frame, the 1000s to 1200s. so vikings, they settled the faroe islands, iceland and greenland and st. anthony newfoundland. and in l\'anse aux meadows, around 1000 ad, which gives them knowledge of the area. it is well documented that members of the viking culture explored and built settlements in north america as much as 10 centuries ago, reaching as far south as l\'anse aux meadows, a location in modern day newfoundland, canada that is approximately 625 miles northeast of oak island. 	CoOI S11E18.1
south as l\'anse aux meadows, a location in modern day newfoundland, canada that is approximately 625 miles northeast of oak island. it has been speculated by many academic researchers, based on the 13th century writings, known as the viking sagas, that they may have visited areas much further to the south. now what becomes important about l\'anse aux meadows, is l\'anse aux meadows, it\'s easy to sail down the west coast of newfoundland with land in sight. i don\'t think it\'s unreasonable to say oak island was explored, certainly mahone bay would have been explored, and the trips are described as going to the southwest. 	CoOI S11E18.1
oak island was explored, certainly mahone bay would have been explored, and the trips are described as going to the southwest. so i\'m gonna tie early templars to vikings. so is anything else interesting happening in the world in 1100? the crusades? the first crusade. in 1099, jerusalem is taken by the crusaders. some of them are the original knights templars. here is the taking of jerusalem. many people feel that they spent their time exploring underground and looking for religious relic. for several years, rick, marty and the team have been researching the order of the knights templar and their possible connection to the oak island mystery. 	CoOI S11E18.1
and the team have been researching the order of the knights templar and their possible connection to the oak island mystery. it is known that the templar order established their headquarters on the temple mount in jerusalem during the early 12th century while defending christian interests in the holy wars known as the crusades. they amassed a great fortune by establishing the world\'s first banking system. however, some believe that they also found a number of priceless religious relics, including the holy grail and the ark of the covenant. the templar order would eventually be disbanded by the catholic church in 1307, but their belief to treasures have never been found. 	CoOI S11E18.1
templar order would eventually be disbanded by the catholic church in 1307, but their belief to treasures have never been found. could there be any evidence that the templars transported them to oak island with the help of the vikings. according to the sagas, in 1107, there was a king sigurd of norway who decided, let\'s make a pilgrimage to the holy land. so sigurd gets together 5,000 men and 60 ships and then they are off to jerusalem. while they\'re in jerusalem, they tour the temple mount, they interact with knights who would form the knights templar eight years later. 	CoOI S11E18.1
they\'re in jerusalem, they tour the temple mount, they interact with knights who would form the knights templar eight years later. and then what happens? king sigurd returns to norway and he leaves many of his men and all of their boats in jerusalem. we\'ve got many vikings left in the holy land, 1110. we don\'t know what happened to them or when they would have left. so what\'s interesting about this? they could have had knowledge of this area prior to the need to flee or hide something. so templars used vikings for transportation to come to a promised land. 	CoOI S11E18.1
use vikings for transportation to come to north america. wow. so, here\'s a summary. vikings with knowledge of north america and how to get there. vikings in the holy land with seaworthy ships. vikings with contacts to early templars. i see all those things as facts. mm-hmm. in the war room, researcher dr. doug simmons has just presented his incredible theory. that members of the viking culture intermingled with the knights templar during the 12th century crusades in the holy land and then helped them transport priceless religious treasures to oak island. from what you\'ve shown, there was a relationship between the vikings and the templars, especially around the crusader times. 	CoOI S11E18.2
from what you\'ve shown, there was a relationship between the vikings and the templars, especially around the crusader times. and if anything was found in jerusalem to make a voyage and take it all the way to nova scotia it actually is plausible. yeah, i think that it could have been done. the remaining questions are, and why? and why? yeah. and you get significant finds in the same time frame as the stories in the 1000 to 1300 ad range. you\'ve got the stick in the bottom of the manmade well that is on lot 26. you\'ve got the paved area of the swamp, the platform. 	CoOI S11E18.2
you\'ve got the paved area of the swamp, the platform. the paved area also might have been a landing area for boats. that\'s interesting because if that was open to the sea, it would be smaller ships like that. they could probably come in and perhaps that was a dock. right. viking ships would be small enough to fit into the swamp. yeah. and you\'ve got nolan\'s cross-construction in the same time frame. that\'s right. that fits right in. wow. in addition to nolan\'s cross and the other megalithic stone formations on oak island\'s surface that are believed to have been created in the 13th century, the team has also obtained evidence that a stone well located on lot 26 and a massive paved area that was uncovered in the swamp may have been constructed more than 800 years ago. 	CoOI S11E18.2
26 and a massive paved area that was uncovered in the swamp may have been constructed more than 800 years ago. all i know is i\'m running out of ways to be skeptical about the templars. could dr. doug simmons\' incredible theory that these formations were all created by members of the knights templar with the help of the vikings be true? if so, might that also explain how the two recently unearthed artifacts which have been traced to scandinavia ended up on oak island? the connection that has been presented between vikings and templars. obviously, we\'re going to continue to pursue that. 	CoOI S11E18.2
the connection that has been presented between vikings and templars. obviously, we\'re going to continue to pursue that. it\'s a line of investigation that may be very important to us. in terms of depositional work on the island, here is where cultural context means a lot. it is amazing how far back knowledge of north america was a lot more widespread than when i learned history in, say, grade school. i found this really interesting. i agree with you. we should look further into this possible viking-templar connection and what it may mean in terms of advancing our search agendas. so thank you very much. 	CoOI S11E18.2
so thank you very much. thank you. till the next time, gentlemen. see you tomorrow, yeah. later that afternoon, while the investigation of the possible treasure tunnel below the garden shaft continues in the money pit area. i\'m ready to kick some swamp. boink! find some good finds. rick lagina, metal detection expert gary drayton and billy gerhardt are searching for clues at the southern border of the mysterious triangle-shaped swamp. i figure it\'s like old home week, right? we came back home because we never finished this. not quite. we were close. in a way, we know what we\'re looking for. 	CoOI S11E18.2
not quite. we were close. in a way, we know what we\'re looking for. we\'re definitely looking for more pieces than what we found earlier. yep. yep. we found wood from ships. yep. for that reason alone, it\'s worth looking at. got a piece of cut wood there? in recent years, the team has found a number of ship-related artifacts in the swamp that have been dated to between the 15th and 18th centuries. however, in 2020, they unearthed a piece of ship\'s railing right near the southern border that was carbon dated to as early as the 8th century. we\'re off the end of the road, right? 	CoOI S11E18.2
we\'re off the end of the road, right? man, would it be so nice if we found something that really told us who was here and when they were here. i hope so. all right, mike. all right. dr. doug simmons\' incredible theory about the medieval viking culture potentially being connected to the oak island mystery. they are eager to see what other possible clues they may uncover in this area. there\'s this new stuff here. woo, smells like treasure. whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. what did you see, rick? wood. is that anything? that\'s an iring. is it cut? yeah. 	CoOI S11E18.2
what did you see, rick? wood. is that anything? that\'s an iring. is it cut? yeah. it\'s got an hole in it, right? there\'s no metals in there, but it\'s definitely shaped. think so. yep. and it looks like it could come off a boat. we found something, billy. check this out. it\'s an interesting piece of wood. any ideas? well, i\'ll tell you what it looks like to me. see how it curves up? yeah. when you have a wooden boat, they put little runners on that were used along the shore. it\'s like the keel of a boat. yeah, so say you\'ve got a big boat here, and you were bringing your little one to shore, they put these little ribs on because they would wear, rather than wear the bottom of your boat. 	CoOI S11E18.2
one to shore, they put these little ribs on because they would wear, rather than wear the bottom of your boat. we would call them runners. yeah, maybe it hit the rocks. yes, exactly, right there. and got broke off. good insight, billy. we put that in the bag. is it possible that the oak island team has found more evidence of a ship  in the swamp? if so, just how old could it be? and who were the visitors that left it here? i need to go back. i gotta check on a few things for the money pit drilling. 	CoOI S11E18.2
i need to go back. i gotta check on a few things for the money pit drilling. so keep digging, keep after it, and i\'ll try to get back as soon as i can. yep. okay, mike. see you later. all right, thank you. i believe that this is a very old mystery. we have dates from 700 ad with the ships railing. we have the 1200 dates in the swamp. so there are strong suggestions that there was activity very early on, but to what end? that\'s what makes this so interesting. hey gary. hey steve. how you doing? good. 	CoOI S11E18.2
yep, that\'s shaped wood. that\'s interesting. while excavating near the southern border of the oak island swamp, billy gerhardt, gary drayton and steve guptill have just made another potentially important discovery. gary, this looks like it could be an old ship part. yeah. we found the ship\'s railing just right over here. and this to me has a similar finish on the top. it\'s about the same size and weight. and look. it has a place where you put a nail or a fastener. yeah, that\'s definitely an old mate, from a fastener. it could be another piece that dates as old as that ship railing. 	CoOI S11E18.3
it could be another piece that dates as old as that ship railing. yeah. hand-shaped wood found in the same area where the team unearthed a piece of ship\'s railing in 2020 that was dated to as early as the eighth century? this has for sure been in man\'s hands. if steve guptill is correct, that this artifact may be from the same era. could it represent more evidence to support dr. doug simmons\' belief that vikings may have visited oak island approximately 1,000 years ago. in terms of artifact recovery in the swamp, the ships railing, and these very early, early, early carbon dates, they have to be telling a story and you have to come to an understanding of what they may or may not represent. 	CoOI S11E18.3
to be telling a story and you have to come to an understanding of what they may or may not represent. well, you know what? it\'s worth taking back. you\'re right, mate. we\'re taking any interesting pieces of wood back because of that ship\'s rail. yeah, that\'s right. piecing the ship together, one piece at a time. yeah, this is good. while billy, gary, and steve continue digging for clues in the swamp, and as the operation to uncover the possible treasure tunnel proceeds beneath the garden shaft. hey, hey. hi there. on this side. have you reached the bottom yet? 	CoOI S11E18.3
hey, hey. hi there. on this side. have you reached the bottom yet? this is at the bottom here. that is almost. all right. near the center of lot 5, located on the western side of the island. i think we\'re back to sifting. jack bailey joins archaeologists laird niven and helen sheldon, where they continue investigating a mysterious rectangular foundation. sub all the way to the bottom of it. yeah. since rick, marty, and krunk tester\'s purchase of lot 5 one year ago, the team has made a number of intriguing discoveries in and near the site, including pottery and pipe stems that have been dated to the same era as the 18th century garden shaft. 	CoOI S11E18.3
the site, including pottery and pipe stems that have been dated to the same era as the 18th century garden shaft. however, just several yards to the south, the team discovered three roman coins dating back to between 1500 and 2000 years ago. i\'m not ready to stop here yet. yeah. now, laird and helen are carefully removing soil from the bottom of the feature so that jack can sift the materials for potential clues that could help determine who created it and when. oh, we\'ve got something here. what\'s that? i don\'t know. oh wow. oh yeah. we have a coin. 	CoOI S11E18.3
oh, we\'ve got something here. what\'s that? i don\'t know. oh wow. oh yeah. we have a coin. look at that. oh my gosh. nice. it\'s copper. you can see the bit of green patina there. a copper coin? all of the team has made discoveries in this feature that have been dated to the 18th century. could this coin, which was found in a deeper layer of the foundation, be older and also help identify who originally created it? really good find, helen. this is the type of thing that marty\'s gonna want to see, so let me send him a text. 	CoOI S11E18.3
this is the type of thing that marty\'s gonna want to see, so let me send him a text. good stuff. yeah, definitely. as we work away with our excavations, it\'s more and more evident to us that it is an older and perhaps much more important feature. so it\'s really exciting. we\'re finding lots of artifacts and we can\'t wait to get down to the bottom of this. okay. oh. hey marty. here at my favorite pastime. anything new? yeah, we just popped out a coin. oh, i like that. any dates? it\'s not in very good shape. it\'s copper because you can see the green patina on it. 	CoOI S11E18.3
any dates? it\'s not in very good shape. it\'s copper because you can see the green patina on it. at the moment, i would say it\'s a george iii half penny. it\'s the same size, same metal, same sort of weight, which is like 1780s. nice, that\'s excellent, right down there in the black stuff? no, it was actually up here on the side. on the edge. yeah, now i\'m actually getting down to the bottom. i took all that out yesterday, and what i found was that this jumble of rocks continued further down, and very few artifacts at all. 	CoOI S11E18.3
out yesterday, and what i found was that this jumble of rocks continued further down, and very few artifacts at all. so what does that suggest? i still think it\'s an infilled cellar. from when? well, it was filled in the 1780s, so before then. excellent. because archaeologist helen sheldon believes that this possibly 18th century coin is an indication of when this foundation was purposely infilled or buried. what this coin discovery ultimately suggests is that the feature predates that time period. so the burning questions surrounding this feature on lot 5 remain. who built it? when? for what purpose? 	CoOI S11E18.3
so the burning questions surrounding this feature on lot 5 remain. who built it? when? for what purpose? maybe there was some sort of structure at the rectangular feature, and then it was intentionally buried. if we could get a definitive date, it could be very, very interesting as to who was here first and what were they doing. well, that\'s fabulous. who knows where that might lead. and we also have this funny piece of metal that\'s sticking out, which i don\'t know what it is yet. how solidly is it in there? it\'s in there pretty, oh, no, maybe it\'s wiggling. 	CoOI S11E18.3
what about that big piece of iron? i think it\'s probably out. while investigating the mysterious rectangular stone foundation on lot 5 on the western side of oak island, marty lagina, along with other members of the team, have just found another potentially important clue. oh wow, i think we\'ve got something here. oh, it\'s a spike. what did it get to me? is it square? rose head? square nicely pointed here. let me have a look that\'s huge. yeah, way too big for a house. that\'s a nice example of a very old nail. it\'s the biggest one we\'ve seen. 	CoOI S11E18.4
that\'s a nice example of a very old nail. it\'s the biggest one we\'ve seen. it\'s big, yeah, it\'s so long. yeah, it\'s definitely forged. yeah, it is, isn\'t it? hand-forged iron spike embedded in the wall of the stone foundation on lot 5? because archaeologists laird niven and helen sheldon believe that it would not be the kind of fastener used in the construction of a house, could it be an important clue that might help the team determine just why this feature was created? it\'s incredibly gratifying all the things we\'re finding and the fact that this is bigger than we thought. 	CoOI S11E18.4
it\'s incredibly gratifying all the things we\'re finding and the fact that this is bigger than we thought. this is something different than a domestic structure. maybe we\'re finding the camp that would have been necessary for such a big operation as what happened at the money pit. for its length, it\'s very slender. it is. and then of course we\'ll test the metallurgy. normally they\'re more hefty when they\'re this long. interesting piece. alright, find some more stuff. see ya marty. you\'re like a good luck charm. yeah, this time, yeah. the following morning... i know one thing, gary. quite exciting, right? 	CoOI S11E18.4
yeah, this time, yeah. the following morning... i know one thing, gary. quite exciting, right? yeah. pulling metal out of that tunnel that deep. yeah. brilliant. rick lagina, gary drayton, and other members of the team meet with blacksmithing expert carmen legge in the oak island laboratory. oh, without further ado... top pocket. top pocket finds, yeah. there you go, mate. there\'s the two finds. they are eager to have carmen and archaeometallergist emma culligan examine the two metal artifacts that gary discovered one week ago within the possible treasure tunnel that sits below the garden shaft. how heavy are they? 	CoOI S11E18.4
how heavy are they? this one is light and this one\'s a bit heavier. looks like it\'s shaped, but i think that the tips are fasteners and the rest of them are underneath the boards. carmen, what do you see there? what\'s your first impressions, carmen? from looking at this on all angles, i had no clue what this is. and that\'s why we found it really interesting as well. if you look at it, it has a flat top. it does, yes. it has a little flare on the end there as well, and the bottom is rounded. that could be just incrustation, right? 	CoOI S11E18.4
that could be just incrustation, right? very interesting. it would be nice to know what\'s inside. emma, can you run a preliminary scan? so i\'ll do xrf on this one because there\'s more exposed and i\'ll do a ct scan on this one. and it shouldn\'t take long because it\'s so tiny. great. all right. in order to provide analysis of the two metal artifacts, emma will scan the smaller one using the skyscan1273 ct scanner, a device which emits x-ray radiation that can penetrate corrosion and sediment on an artifact to produce a three-dimensional image of its finer details. she will concurrently scan the larger object using the x-ray fluorescence spectrometer. 	CoOI S11E18.4
she will concurrently scan the larger object using the x-ray fluorescence spectrometer. this device emits non-destructive radiation to reveal the elements that make up an object\'s composition, which can potentially help determine its age. okay, so i did what i could. is that the bigger piece? yeah. could you look at the bigger end and see if it was sheared off or bent off or anything like that? right there, you can see that. that\'s a snuff. they\'re more than likely a fast snuff. but these are not items to put together structures. would it have been a box, a chest? 	CoOI S11E18.4
but these are not items to put together structures. would it have been a box, a chest? yes, it could have been. yes, there\'s so many things it could have been. it could have been just simply a nail in the side of a wall to hang a lantern on or anything. it\'s hard to say what it was used for. but it definitely wasn\'t anything to do with structure. excellent. that\'s a little bit more motivation to get back down in that tunnel. a metal fastener found in the tunnel below the garden shaft that was possibly used for hanging a lantern or potentially related to a chest? 	CoOI S11E18.4
in the tunnel below the garden shaft that was possibly used for hanging a lantern or potentially related to a chest? if so, has the team found evidence of an operation to deposit valuables deep underground in the money pit area? so this is the smaller one? is it square? i would say it is, yeah. yeah, it\'s tapering. it is hand-wrought. so from the grain structure, it is wrought. nice. this looks like the end of a square nail, or a small spike. very old. why do you say that? just because of the shingle effect of the fibers going down. 	CoOI S11E18.4
very old. why do you say that? just because of the shingle effect of the fibers going down. if you look at the ladder, you can see a little bit of overlap as it goes down the taper. that tells me it\'s very, very old. when you say very old, can you put a time period? for very old? i would say late 14th to mid 1700s. wow. coming up. what\'s happening billy? we got a bunch of horizontal and vertical boards. so you think it could be what fred was probing when he thought he hit the wall? there\'s potential of that. 	CoOI S11E18.4
i would say late 14 to mid 1700s. that\'s definitely a pre-searcher. in the oak island laboratory, blacksmithing expert carmen legge has just informed rick lagina and members of the team that a metal artifact retrieved from the possible treasure tunnel located below the garden shaft could date back to as early as the 15th century. could it be later than the mid-17s? not in my opinion, no. okay, that\'s hugely significant. yeah. i mean, that matches the dates that we\'re getting in the tunnel. 1617 hundreds. this is from the wood that came up from the tunnel, from the guard shaft. 	CoOI S11E18.5
1617 hundreds. this is from the wood that came up from the tunnel, from the guard shaft. it\'s from 1631 to 1684. wow. four weeks ago. the oak island team received a carbon dating report that the tunnel just below the garden shaft may have been constructed as much as 150 years prior to the discovery of the money pit. while the team\'s water testing analysis that has been conducted over the past two years in previously drilled boreholes has indicated that there could be numerous treasure deposits buried across the money pit area, is it possible that they are narrowing in on when at least one of them was hidden on oak island? 	CoOI S11E18.5
area, is it possible that they are narrowing in on when at least one of them was hidden on oak island? a lot of the dates strongly suggest some earlier level of participation. but they are so distinctly different timelines that it makes this puzzle all the more complex. but it also opens the door to a lot of other possibilities, perhaps possibilities that we are currently unaware of. and the hope is, as the work continues, we will get more clarity. i will see you and get a hold of my dad. hello. hey. so, there\'s a bunch of us here in the lab and two pieces of iron came out of the garden shaft and carmen, do you want to tell them what the age range was? 	CoOI S11E18.5
of iron came out of the garden shaft and carmen, do you want to tell them what the age range was? just looking at the structure of the nail, the size of the nail, i would say late 14 to mid 1700s. wow. with the lack of manganese and the high content of sulfur, it could indicate yet an older iron source. boom baby, there it is! i agree with him, his tends to be indicative of older metal. listen guys, if we can prove beyond any reasonable doubt that this is an original works, we have had a successful year. 	CoOI S11E18.5
guys, if we can prove beyond any reasonable doubt that this is an original works, we have had a successful year. yep, absolutely. this is big. oh, yeah, for sure mate. alright, well guys, that is fabulous. it\'s absolutely fabulous. keep me informed. okeydoke. alright guys, see you very soon. very nice. this is different. this is a different moment we are at. at some level, it\'s a very pivotal moment. i\'ve got tunnel vision right now. later that afternoon. this is it, mate. i love this spot. so we\'ll really have to keep our eyes open. all right. gary drayton, steve guptill, and billy gerhardt continue excavating for important clues near the southern border of the swamp. 	CoOI S11E18.5
gary drayton, steve guptill, and billy gerhardt continue excavating for important clues near the southern border of the swamp. i\'m always excited to get in the swamp, especially in the southeast corner because we have already recovered some amazing artifacts from this area. if we can find more parts of that ship, it will be a great day on oak island. what\'s happening, billy? you know, it\'s got a little wood here and i... what kind of wood? somebody\'s dug down in the swamp and we\'ve got a bunch of horizontal and vertical boards. there\'s a wall of a shaft retaining wall, something. 	CoOI S11E18.5
there\'s a wall of a shaft retaining wall, something. maybe it\'s what fred broke. so you think it could be potentially what fred was broken when he thought he hit the wall? well, there\'s potential of that. a possible wall buried at the southern border of the swamp? while investigating this area more than 30 years ago, the late treasure hunter and oak island landowner, fred nolan, reportedly discovered a wooden wall or dam. a dam that fred believed represented evidence that the swamp was an artificial feature that had been created centuries ago in order to hide something of great value. 	CoOI S11E18.5
that the swamp was an artificial feature that had been created centuries ago in order to hide something of great value. is it possible that the team has found a section of that same construct? and if so, could it be related to the potentially 1250 year old piece of ships railing that the team found nearby back in 2020? i think we\'re on to something. i think we got to get the guys here. it looks like somebody was digging down in the depths of the swan. you make a good point, billy. i mean, it\'s really close. i would say feet off the stone road so i think it could be really important and maybe related to the stone road for sure let\'s get back to base tell the guys. 	CoOI S11E18.5
i am more curious in terms of did somebody excavate here put that in in modern times or is it older. righ.t after a mysterious wooden structure was discovered at the southern edge of the swamp just one day ago. you probably want to take a look at some point yeah. rick lagina has invited geoscientist dr. ian spooner to inspect the feature. what interests me is it\'s down into the sediment. i really want to see the context of that and the sediment around it. we can see this red stuff here. that red stuff is what\'s underneath the stone road. 	CoOI S11E18.6
we can see this red stuff here. that red stuff is what\'s underneath the stone road. right. just to the west lies the potentially 500-year-old stone road or ship\'s wharf, a feature that may date to roughly the same time period as the wooden tunnel below the garden shaft. we start seeing that red stuff within and around that wood structure that will possibly place it further back in time. yeah. is it possible that this feature may be related to the nearby stone road as dr. spooner is speculating and perhaps also to the possible treasure tunnel in the money pit area. 	CoOI S11E18.6
spooner is speculating and perhaps also to the possible treasure tunnel in the money pit area. this was always the area that i was really interested in in terms of trying to find something that connects the stone road to something else. right. we know it had to be used for something else and they were going somewhere and doing something. yeah. if this is as old as the stone road, could this have been some sort of a loading and unloading platform? that\'s kind of interesting. you can tie something to the cargo and swing it off, unload, load, unload, load. 	CoOI S11E18.6
that\'s kind of interesting. you can tie something to the cargo and swing it off, unload, load, unload, load. sure. they\'d pull the big boat up. yep. they\'d unload their goods. yeah. and they could have built other structures as well. yep. there\'s precious little known about the southeast corner of the swamp. i wish i understood why we\'re making these discoveries in the swamp that has endured over two centuries. i think there were activities conducted here, maybe not by the same persons, but maybe by the same group or entity, over generations, perhaps even centuries. this wood here is interesting too, because it\'s round on the edges, flat on the top. 	CoOI S11E18.6
this wood here is interesting too, because it\'s round on the edges, flat on the top. that\'s pretty old. i think the desire in all parts is to dig and expose the structure in its entirety so we can come to a real good understanding of its purpose and hopefully there\'s an artifact or two that might tell us what its purpose was. somebody put a huge effort into installing something and we have to be careful, is that all i\'m saying? mm-hmm. okay. i think that\'s pretty cool. yeah. right now. call it a day? yeah. okay. all right. thank you. 	CoOI S11E18.6
mm-hmm. okay. i think that\'s pretty cool. yeah. right now. call it a day? yeah. okay. all right. thank you. yep. all right. good job. thanks, billy. for the laginas and their team, the complexity and intrigue of the 229-year-old oak island mystery continues to grow. could it truly have originated more than a thousand years ago with a secret deposit of priceless holy relics? and could there have been a generational conspiracy that followed in order to protect and add to those treasures? the evidence and research suggest that it\'s possible. and perhaps the ultimate question now is, can rick, marty, and their team prove it? 	CoOI S11E18.6
s11e9.1 time to drain the swamp. do it. the swamp holds secrets to the mystery. oh, no. oh. that\'s interesting. what do you got? holy crap. it seems like jewelry. a symbol found on templar churches pointing directly to oak island and is believed to represent the holy grail. oh. if there\'s gold in that void, that\'d be huge. there\'s something there. there is an island in the north atlantic. where people have been looking for an incredible treasure for more than 200 years. so far, they have found a stone slab with strange symbols carved into it, man-made workings that date to medieval times, and a lead cross whose origin may be connected to the knights templar. 	CoOI S11E9.1
it, man-made workings that date to medieval times, and a lead cross whose origin may be connected to the knights templar. to date, six men have died trying to solve the mystery. and according to legend, one more will have to die before the treasure can be found. how\'s it going, guys? what have you got for us today? the guys are down there right now, so we identified a water source. it looks like it\'s confined to one space. ok. an especially anxious morning has begun on oak island for brothers rick and marty lagina and their team as they work to solve a 229-year-old mystery. 	CoOI S11E9.1
begun on oak island for brothers rick and marty lagina and their team as they work to solve a 229-year-old mystery. so quite a bit of water, we\'re looking at about 250 gallons a minute. and i think that\'s our biggest problem down there. right. we want to look. absolutely. that\'s absolutely. i\'m ready. sounds good. let\'s go. all right. in the money pit area, representatives from dumas contracting limited believe they have finally identified the location where a mysterious inflow of water has been flooding the 87-foot deep mid-18th century garden shaft for nearly two weeks. what remains unknown is if it may be related to a legendary man-made flood tunnel that was reportedly triggered during an excavation of the original money pit back in 1804, and which has thwarted the efforts of treasure hunters ever since. 	CoOI S11E9.1
an excavation of the original money pit back in 1804, and which has thwarted the efforts of treasure hunters ever since. it\'s a long, bloody way down, you know? now, rick and marty are descending the garden shaft themselves to inspect the cavern and the mysterious inflow of water in order to help dumas not only identify what each feature may be, but also decide how to achieve their ultimate goal of extending the garden shaft down to a depth of some 95 feet, where they hope to breach a 7-foot-high tunnel. a tunnel which runs westward towards an area known as the baby blob, where high traces of gold, silver, and other metals have been detected between 80 and 120 feet deep. 	CoOI S11E9.1
the baby blob, where high traces of gold, silver, and other metals have been detected between 80 and 120 feet deep. ok, here we be. i believe now we can see where the water\'s coming from. source of the water. do you think it is all right here? i would say 80% that\'s where it\'s coming from. we will be sealing up the source of the water with multi-urethane. if you stop the source, then we can see when it\'s passed out and build voids and everything like that. without this water coming in. yeah. now that the team from dumas contracting limited has identified the source of the water, over the coming days, they will attempt to seal it using an industrial-grade compound known as multiurethane that expands when wet. 	CoOI S11E9.1
over the coming days, they will attempt to seal it using an industrial-grade compound known as multiurethane that expands when wet. if you look in here, turn your light on good, you\'ll see the big boy. in there, there\'s a, it\'s like a little cavern. one week ago, while dumas was searching for the water source at a depth of nearly 65 feet, their team also discovered a strange cavity just outside the shaft containing wooden timbers. and in the same general area where last year, a sample of wood from the garden shaft was found to contain high trace evidence of gold. 	CoOI S11E9.1
area where last year, a sample of wood from the garden shaft was found to contain high trace evidence of gold. i think that we were all quite interested in what this cavity void represents. we have spent a lot of time to try to follow the golden and silver. if there\'s gold in that void, that\'d be huge. that cavity might prove to be very interesting. what about the wood that we heard was in there? some of it\'s still there, and some of it\'s at the bottom of the void, i guess. oh, yeah, i do see it. how far in is it? 	CoOI S11E9.1
oh, yeah, i do see it. how far in is it? here, take a look. this looks like a little grotto. what is it, about three feet back there? four feet, maybe? yeah, it goes back and up. there\'s a board right there. you got it. you come here, you. how about that then? that\'s from the original shaft. i don\'t see enough wood to represent some other construct. i think at this point, it\'s probably associated with the original shaft construct. there are some pieces of wood in there. they don\'t look ancient to me. i think whoever dug the original garden shaft, as they were going down, might have needed a little bit of work room. 	CoOI S11E9.1
think whoever dug the original garden shaft, as they were going down, might have needed a little bit of work room. that\'s what i think we\'re looking at. so more importantly, we have the metals in the water by the garden shaft. and the metals are inclusive of gold and silver. so the next thing that has to be done in the garden shaft is we have to get control of this water. ok, we sort of got two issues going here, right? we got this water. yeah. and then we got this issue over here. but we know on the outside of the old shaft, we found traces of gold. 	CoOI S11E9.1
but we know on the outside of the old shaft, we found traces of gold. ok. yeah, we got some good samples here. we got a piece of wood from the cavity. our job here is done. as representatives from dumas continue their work in the garden shaft, later that morning. billy. i was hoping you\'d leave some work for us. rick and marty join billy gerhardt on the south shore road, bordering the triangle-shaped swamp. it\'s that time of year again, isn\'t it? time to drain the swamp. yeah. having just acquired a government permit, the team is ready to drain the brackish water from the swamp to search for clues that may be critical to solving the oak island mystery. 	CoOI S11E9.1
drain the brackish water from the swamp to search for clues that may be critical to solving the oak island mystery. so what\'s the plan, rick? you know, i avoid all things swamp. well, i think the swamp holds secrets, but i don\'t know where they are, to be honest with you. yeah, i think i\'m more excited about the swamp, probably, than i have been to date. really? yeah, because we have the ships railed. you know, we got the road, we got the path, a ton of stuff, and we\'ve only done one of the three sides. yeah. in addition to ancient coins, ship pieces, and fragments of cargo barrels. 	CoOI S11E9.1
yeah. in addition to ancient coins, ship pieces, and fragments of cargo barrels. in recent years, rick, marty, and the team have uncovered a number of stone structures, such as a road or ship\'s wharf near the south shore road. i\'m most interested in what lies at the end of the stone road. if it\'s a slipway, that\'s important. if it\'s a wharf, it\'s important. so if i started anywhere, it would be the stone road. once the area is drained, billy will help the team excavate the south shore road in the hoax of finding definitive answers of who built the massive stone feature and if any evidence of valuables remains hidden nearby. 	CoOI S11E9.1
hoax of finding definitive answers of who built the massive stone feature and if any evidence of valuables remains hidden nearby. when are you going to start that bad boy up? well, i think i did lots of times, so one of you guys should have the honor. big brother, let\'s get going. in accordance with environmental regulations, rather than pumping the water into the ocean, it will be diverted several hundred yards away to the center of the island. time to drain the swamp. do it. get out of here. drain the swamp. as the swamp begins to drain, on lot 5, located on the western side of the island. 	CoOI S11E9.1
drain the swamp. as the swamp begins to drain, on lot 5, located on the western side of the island. i just want to get this level done. ok. alex lagina and members of the team are carefully excavating a circular stone feature that has been determined to set atop a much larger foundation. oh. huh. that\'s cool. that\'s really cool. it\'s a little tiny ring. wow. hey, guys, you want to come take a look at this? sure. sure. it seems like jewelry, but very tiny jewelry. yeah. what do you got there? check that out. oh, yeah. so there\'s no way to determine a time period on this as we sit here right now? 	CoOI S11E9.1
oh, yeah. so there\'s no way to determine a time period on this as we sit here right now? no. this a good find? since they began investigating this feature one year ago, the team has been perplexed by the number of potentially important clues they have found. that\'s really cool. which span a number of eras prior to the discovery of the money pit. these include mid-17th century pottery, a believed 14th century lead barter token, which may be related to the lead cross that was unearthed at smith\'s cove in 2017. and a number of metal tools that have been directly connected to the 17th century privateer, sir william phips an english nobleman who some believe buried a vast cache of silver and gold in the money pit back in 1687. 	CoOI S11E9.1
s11e9.2 lot 5 of oak island. you mind if i take a look? archaeologist jamie kuba has just discovered a possible clue in the mysterious foundation that was found beneath the circular stone depression. interesting. any idea what this might have been used for, if it is decorative? i would think maybe on, like, a wooden door or something, maybe a chest. that\'d be exciting. yeah, that would be exciting. yeah, it\'s very cool. we\'ve got this building that\'s a little too big to be just a residence. i\'m just going to throw this out there. privateering? yeah. it\'s not out of the realm of possibility at all. 	CoOI S11E9.2
i\'m just going to throw this out there. privateering? yeah. it\'s not out of the realm of possibility at all. there was a lot of privateering in this area during that time frame. there\'s so much evidence of that already here, so why would this island not be a part of that to some degree? yeah. we need way more evidence of any kind to say anything for sure. well, the metal pieces that came out of this unit actually was metallurgically connected to phips birthplace. right. and of course, you know, phips we know, found the concepcion. in 1687, the english politician turned privateer and treasure hunter sir william phips was ordered by the king of england to conduct two salvage operations of the famed spanish galleon wreck known as the concepcion, which sank off the coast of the dominican republic in 1641. 	CoOI S11E9.2
of the famed spanish galleon wreck known as the concepcion, which sank off the coast of the dominican republic in 1641. curiously, during the second recovery mission, which was carried out with the help of a high-ranking freemason from nova scotia named andrew belcher, phips delivered less than 10% of what remained on the wreck according to its manifest. we know that phips found silver on the concepcion. this documented fact led scott clark, a 32nd degree freemason, and the author of oak island odyssey, a masonic quest, to share his theory with a team in 2021 regarding the whereabouts of the missing valuables. 	CoOI S11E9.2
island odyssey, a masonic quest, to share his theory with a team in 2021 regarding the whereabouts of the missing valuables. i believe some of the treasure from the concepcion was secreted to oak island. that is remarkable. yeah. so phips may not have sent all of the silver back to england. so there is that theory that maybe he hid some of it here. right. because the team has already found several metal tools that have been scientifically connected to sir william phips in this feature on lot 5, could jamie be correct that they, as well as this decorative metal piece, offer compelling evidence that sir william phips could really be connected to the oak island mystery? 	CoOI S11E9.2
as this decorative metal piece, offer compelling evidence that sir william phips could really be connected to the oak island mystery? look, they\'re great finds, but i think they\'re enough to get us started, but they\'re not enough to get us there, right? yeah. we\'re finding cool things, so i\'m sure there\'s going to be more. yeah. the following morning. ok, ray, so we should be able to keep an eye on them down there, right? yeah. man, look at that water. marty lagina arrives in the money pit area to monitor the ongoing effort to stop the flooding in the garden shaft using a sealant known as multiurethane nearly 65 feet below ground. 	CoOI S11E9.2
ongoing effort to stop the flooding in the garden shaft using a sealant known as multiurethane nearly 65 feet below ground. we\'ll get the urethane mix ready to go. i just want to just try and get as much pumped in there as fast as we can. ok. the hope is that we\'re going to pump this foam into there. yep. it\'s going to expand up to 20 times its size, and it\'s going to fill that void and seal the water up. ok, here we go. start pumping. coming on. just like surgery. scalpel. come on, guys. you can do this. 	CoOI S11E9.2
ok, here we go. start pumping. coming on. just like surgery. scalpel. come on, guys. you can do this. while the work continues in the garden shaft. later that morning. gentlemen, i don\'t think our guest needs any sort of introduction because we all know scott clark. marty joins his brother rick and other members of the team to welcome author and 32nd degree freemason scott clark back to the war room. in light of the recent discoveries made on lot 5 that have been connected to sir william phips scott has asked to share more information about phips personal assistant, andrew belcher, that may further help prove his incredible theory. 	CoOI S11E9.2
scott has asked to share more information about phips personal assistant, andrew belcher, that may further help prove his incredible theory. andrew belcher has been a person of interest for a long time. he\'s very likely one of the very earliest freemasons in north america. i believe that the belcher family knew about oak island from connections through freemasonry. based on stunning discoveries that have been made in recent years on oak island, including structures such as the paved area and the stone road in the swamp, along with a tunnel running below the garden shaft, and artifacts like the lead cross and a red garnet stone, which have all been scientifically dated to between the 12th and 17th centuries. 	CoOI S11E9.2
the lead cross and a red garnet stone, which have all been scientifically dated to between the 12th and 17th centuries. welcome to the templar city. rick, marty, and their team have been carefully investigating the theory that the medieval order of the knights templar and their believed descendants, the freemasons, carried out a generational conspiracy to hide not only vast amounts of gold, silver, and jewels in the money pit area, but also priceless religious objects so i\'ll get into my presentation. great. my current research involves a really important map that i found in the archives of canada from 1762, which i believe has masonic ciphers encoded in the map. 	CoOI S11E9.2
map that i found in the archives of canada from 1762, which i believe has masonic ciphers encoded in the map. and i found evidence that they could strongly tie with the knights templars. really? yep. so the map that i\'ve been referring to was created in 1762 by nova scotia\'s chief surveyor and early freemason, charles morris. so that\'s actually the whole map itself. so this is the very earliest map, i believe, of mahome bay that shows oak island. so when morris actually surveyed mahone bay back in 1762, he would have been asked to do so by his boss at the time, nova scotia\'s lieutenant governor, jonathan belcher, jr., the grandson of captain andrew belcher, who worked directly with sir william phips jonathan belcher, jr. 	CoOI S11E9.2
lieutenant governor, jonathan belcher, jr., the grandson of captain andrew belcher, who worked directly with sir william phips jonathan belcher, jr. was also the masonic grand master of the provincial grand lodge of nova scotia. no kidding. quite remarkable, right? so morris, in 1762, surveyed mahone bay, which is the same year that the islands divided a lot. yeah, by him. by morris. yes. yeah. so the map was made by the guy that divided the island into lots. definitely, yes. yeah. of the more than 350 islands found in mahone bay, oak island was the only one chosen to be divided up into four-acre lots in 1762. 	CoOI S11E9.2
islands found in mahone bay, oak island was the only one chosen to be divided up into four-acre lots in 1762. is it possible that charles morris was directed to do this by jonathan belcher, jr., because of belcher\'s secret knowledge of what was hidden there? so as i was studying this map, it occurred to me that the a in mahon had this v-shaped crossbar, which was different than the a in bay, with a much more normal straight crossbar. so that\'s the a with a v-shaped crossbar. and according to templar researchers in portugal, the a with a v-shaped crossbar is believed by a number of people to represent the holy grail. 	CoOI S11E9.2
researchers in portugal, the a with a v-shaped crossbar is believed by a number of people to represent the holy grail. is that right, charles? is that true? yes. researchers have suggested that these a symbols with a v-shaped crossbar look very similar to the masonic compass and square logo, which was later adopted by freemasons. and knowing that morris was a freemason, my first thought was that he was encompassing masonic compass and square. so i quickly realized that the masonic script a was pointing directly up to oak island 33 years before the discovery of the money pit. and you think that he had an idea that treasure was already on the island? 	CoOI S11E9.2
s11e9.3 this map was made since it was before the discovery of the money pit, that he had an idea that treasure was already on the island. for sure he did, yes. in the war room, 32nd degree freemason scott clark has just presented a map of mahone bay that was created in 1762 by charles morris, the high-ranking freemason who divided oak island into four-acre lots that very same year. and curiously, scott believes the map contains secret symbols indicating that sacred religious treasures of the knights templar are buried on oak island. so at first, i thought this masonic strip day in mahon was the only one. 	CoOI S11E9.3
so at first, i thought this masonic strip day in mahon was the only one. but as i kept looking, i discovered three more in the name st. margaret\'s bay on the far right of the map. by utilizing those three small a\'s in the name st. margaret\'s bay. if you created a circle on the map using the exact arc created by the three masonic script a\'s, the circle will not only pass directly through the compass rows of the map, but also directly over oak island. it seems clear that morris actually knew the secret before anyone outside of the depositors knew that oak island was special. 	CoOI S11E9.3
it seems clear that morris actually knew the secret before anyone outside of the depositors knew that oak island was special. did morris do any other maps? i mean, is that the only map that he has those a\'s? he did other maps, and i\'ve never seen that same a from him. and those same symbols i found on templar chapels and churches. so within the church of santa maria de olaval in tomar, portugal, we find the tombstone of walden pays, who was the fourth grand master of the knights templar in portugal. there is an a symbol with a v-shaped crossbar, which i\'ve highlighted in red. 	CoOI S11E9.3
there is an a symbol with a v-shaped crossbar, which i\'ve highlighted in red. a very similar symbol, a symbol with a v-shaped crossbar, can be found carved into the convento di cristo, or convent of christ, that belonged to the knights of christ, also in tomar. there is also an a symbol with a v-shaped crossbar carved into a pillar... yep. ...within the santa maria nuova church in viterbo, italy. mm-hmm. saw it, right? i\'ve seen all this so far. over the past two years. hey, guys. this symbol is definitely on the 90-foot stone right there. that\'s perfect. yep. 	CoOI S11E9.3
over the past two years. hey, guys. this symbol is definitely on the 90-foot stone right there. that\'s perfect. yep. rick, alex, and other members of the team have visited numerous sites in both portugal and italy that were known strongholds for the templar order between the 12th and 16th centuries. wow, that\'s incredible. you think speechless? you see this. and in all of these locations. h-i-c. which in latin means here. including those just noted by scott clark. they have seen symbols, artifacts, and even structures matching others that have been found over the years on oak island. the stone path looks exactly like this. 	CoOI S11E9.3
the stone path looks exactly like this. yeah, it looks the spitting image. just to recap, it seems clear that morris actually knew from his masonic connections that there was already some sort of deposit on oak island. this certainly provides some tantalizing clue. yeah, for sure. all theories are unique, but with scott\'s, he actually has a document, the charles morris map. through his research into masonic symbolism, he has made some connections there. i mean, we\'ve always been confounded that charles morris, the surveyor general, surveys oak island, and yet there were, at the time, 300-plus islands in the bay, and they weren\'t surveyed. 	CoOI S11E9.3
surveyor general, surveys oak island, and yet there were, at the time, 300-plus islands in the bay, and they weren\'t surveyed. we know the history of masonic association with the island, and that there was some sort of interest or some sort of knowledge about the importance of the island. it\'s an incredibly interesting theory. the story of what might have happened here long ago scott, thank you. i am always amazed how many things can possibly be related to oak island through history. and yet, it\'s plausible. so we thank you for coming here. and don\'t be a stranger. thanks, guys. 	CoOI S11E9.3
and yet, it\'s plausible. so we thank you for coming here. and don\'t be a stranger. thanks, guys. the following day. hope we can get the water to stop. as members of the team continue their work to stop the mysterious flooding inside the garden shaft. hey, billy. hey. good day. rick and alex lagina, along with metal detection expert gary drayton, join billy gerhardt at the south shore of the swamp. we\'re going to do a dig past the stone road to see the extent of it. it\'s something you\'ve always wanted to do. now that some three million gallons of brackish water have been pumped out of the bog, they are eager to once again investigate the stone road. 	CoOI S11E9.3
gallons of brackish water have been pumped out of the bog, they are eager to once again investigate the stone road. i\'m hopeful we\'ll be finding all kinds of good stuff. and where are you going to put all the artifacts? in the back of my car. i\'ll start scraping some gravel off. as billy carefully digs, gary drayton will scan the spoils for any important clues or evidence of valuables. we may find a feature or features under the swamp road that may indicate why the stone road was constructed. i\'d like to know every last bit of information that the swamp can give us, and hopefully that information goes towards the greater goal of solving the mystery. 	CoOI S11E9.3
s11e9.4 hey, uncle rick. sure. while excavating the swamp near the potentially 500-year-old stone road. that\'s it? yeah, that\'s it. rick lagina and the members of the team have just made a curious discovery. it looks like a dowel. yep. when i saw it, you know what it reminded me of? the dowels in the u-shaped structure. yeah. it\'s just about how big they were. yeah, they were huge. there\'s a log right there. here\'s a pig right here. is it? a pig. in 2018, rick, marty, and the team unearthed a mysterious feature at smith\'s cove that was originally discovered by dan blankenship in 1971. 	CoOI S11E9.4
rick, marty, and the team unearthed a mysterious feature at smith\'s cove that was originally discovered by dan blankenship in 1971. you got a roman numeral? yeah. if it is, it\'s a 7v11. a nearly 65-foot-long, u-shaped wooden structure that was believed to be associated with the flood tunnels connected to the money pit. it not only featured large wooden dowels, but was also engraved with a unique style of roman numerals. it looks like the i-i-i-i. roman numerals that also match those found on an ancient musket artifact that was discovered six weeks ago in the circular depression on lot 5. 	CoOI S11E9.4
match those found on an ancient musket artifact that was discovered six weeks ago in the circular depression on lot 5. here, there\'s some, like it was cut. yeah. just put it aside. we\'ll wash it. is it possible the oak island team has found evidence of a related wooden structure near the stone road in the swamp? if so, could it be a critical piece of evidence that might help complete the oak island puzzle? hopefully, there\'s more. we\'ll bag this up? yeah. the u-shaped structure is one of the most mysterious things we found on the island. finding another wooden construction using the same technique here in the swamp speaks to the extent of the works on oak island. 	CoOI S11E9.4
another wooden construction using the same technique here in the swamp speaks to the extent of the works on oak island. nope, not getting any of it. nothing. how much deeper before we get to the level of the stone road? let\'s say it\'s another foot. yeah. well, we\'re certainly coming in the zone that we start to look for it more and more, yeah. ok, let\'s keep digging. all right. ok, i\'ll get out of the way. yeah. as the investigation of the swamp continues. i\'d like to see it stop completely. obviously, you guys would do. yeah. do you feel the flow has slowed down any? 	CoOI S11E9.4
obviously, you guys would do. yeah. do you feel the flow has slowed down any? it seems that way. in the money pit area, scott barlow, along with paul cote of dumas contracting limited, have descended some 87 feet to the bottom of the garden shaft in order to assess the progress of their efforts to stop the mysterious inflow of water currently flooding the structure. one of the problems also is the water accumulating overnight while we\'re not here. yes. and then water rising 50 points deep and then getting the pump down. if we start digging deeper right now, we just create a bigger point. 	CoOI S11E9.4
if we start digging deeper right now, we just create a bigger point. if we don\'t fix the problem now. yeah. it has been quite some time, and we really haven\'t made any progress in that shaft. this is one of the main focuses of our efforts this summer, so i\'m a little concerned. on the other hand, i am still very confident that dumas can stop the water, at least control it. we just need to control the water as much as we can. yeah. we\'re going to continue to fill these massive voids with this urethane foam. we need to get to the bottom of the garden shaft and find the treasure that\'s supposedly here. 	CoOI S11E9.4
we need to get to the bottom of the garden shaft and find the treasure that\'s supposedly here. and then let\'s see what happens. and we\'ll just try to keep moving forward, i guess. let\'s go up and make some calls, ok? meanwhile. wow. holy cow, that\'s huge. across the island on lot 5. it\'s massive. the structure is massive. 30 to 40 feet, like, wow. jack begley joins other members of the team who have just made a surface outline of the buried foundation that was identified beneath the circular depression during a recent magnetometry survey. this is way bigger than any other foundation on the island. 	CoOI S11E9.4
this is way bigger than any other foundation on the island. and who knows what other things are going to lie just in between the rocks to really tell us, is this phips related? we don\'t know yet. but i find it to be really hopeful. but it\'s going to take a long time. it would have been a lot of work just to fill it in. but it\'s going to be a lot of work just to dig it back out. and we know, at least, it was not surveyed in 1762, which makes me believe that it was not visible in 1762. 	CoOI S11E9.4
we know, at least, it was not surveyed in 1762, which makes me believe that it was not visible in 1762. but had already been previously constructed and then torn down. yeah, pre-morris. yeah. i really think it was intentionally hidden. yeah. and it\'s for that reason that i think it\'s tied directly to the money pit. wow. yeah, when you said 30 by 45 feet. yeah. i knew how big that was, but to see it taped down, it\'s a whole different story. absolutely. all right, well, i guess let\'s get back to work, because we got a lot to do. 	CoOI S11E9.4
absolutely. all right, well, i guess let\'s get back to work, because we got a lot to do. yeah, let\'s get back to work. the fact that someone came and filled this area in with boulders and tried to cover it up makes you really wonder, like, was it phips and why has it remained hidden for so long? that\'s weird. what\'s up? hmm. i mean, there\'s a line on it, but that\'s natural, right? like, that\'s rock. it\'s not pottery. it\'s definitely not natural. there\'s more on this side. oh. so definitely that was engraved. oh. why would they decorate both sides? 	CoOI S11E9.4
s11e9.5 we found something amazing. really? yeah. i\'d like you to have a look at it and give me your opinion. after being alerted to the discovery of a mysterious stone artifact in the foundation beneath the circular depression on lot 5... this is nothing like anything we\'ve been finding here at all. rick lagina arrives to personally examine it. this is man-made. absolutely. and the strange thing for me is that it\'s carved on both sides, and the edges are clearly, you know, rounded to that figuration. yeah. we\'re still scratching our heads on that. yeah, absolutely. a carved stone found in the buried foundation on lot 5? 	CoOI S11E9.5
we\'re still scratching our heads on that. yeah, absolutely. a carved stone found in the buried foundation on lot 5? could it be related to the numerous metal tools that have been directly linked to sir william phips and if so, might it be an important clue that will help explain how this buried structure may be connected to the oak island mystery? so just catch me up. this outline you have, this is the magnetometer work that was done? yes. we\'ve marked the corners of what looks like the large rectangular structure. and so it doesn\'t look like you would expect a stacked wall to look like. 	CoOI S11E9.5
and so it doesn\'t look like you would expect a stacked wall to look like. so what we think is that whoever built it, they decided to hide it and collapsed it on itself and then buried it. really? yeah. i think that we can definitely say that this feature and the small rectangular feature up there were both intentionally buried. wow. oh, and the artifacts that we\'ve found from just digging down to this depth, and they speak to when this entire structure was buried and covered over. yes. and that\'s still pre-money pit discovery. yes. and we\'re not even to the base floor yet. 	CoOI S11E9.5
yes. and that\'s still pre-money pit discovery. yes. and we\'re not even to the base floor yet. there\'s been some interesting hypotheticals associated with the construct that might help explain it. i think the connection of sir william phips to the lot 5 feature certainly is possible if this is a privateer\'s location, but it does not say definitively, here\'s your answer. i don\'t think we have that yet. everyone\'s excited to get down to that final depth where we can get a real good idea on when this structure was in use. well, congratulations for what you\'ve done. this is quite impressive. 	CoOI S11E9.5
well, congratulations for what you\'ve done. this is quite impressive. it may turn history on its ear, and that\'s pretty cool. yeah. ok, congrats. good luck. thanks. see you, rick. while operations continue on lot 5 and in the money pit area, hey. hey. anything? just finishing up the first day area. rick lagina joins his nephew alex, metal detection expert gary drayton, and billy gerhardt as they continue excavating near the stone road in the southeast corner of the swamp. billy. when you poke with your teeth, it seems like there\'s rocks underneath. so i\'m not really sure. we might want to do a little hand digging there. 	CoOI S11E9.5
so i\'m not really sure. we might want to do a little hand digging there. alex and i can do that. gary needs a digger. one of us can hop up. we\'ll do that then. that\'s a plan. keep this guy busy. i\'m trying. i think anywhere is right in there, yeah? even where your feet are. it has to be in here. it is definitely rockier there. you might want to give steve a call and just give me an idea of the relationship between that depth and the stone road right there. i\'ll dig it down and just see what happens. 	CoOI S11E9.5
s11e9.6 in the triangle-shaped swamp. what is that? that is some kind of chain. yeah. rick lagina and members of the oak island team have just made a potentially important discovery. that has potential to be old, i think. yeah. yeah. it looks old. you can see it. it looks like it\'s hand-forged. yeah. my guess is pre-1840s. oh, wow. well, it\'s the big piece on the end. could be a hook. yeah, either a hook or just a big link. yeah. and you\'d need a chain like this for, hopefully, unloading. right. i\'m not going to say loading. unloading. because we are looking for treasure. 	CoOI S11E9.6
right. i\'m not going to say loading. unloading. because we are looking for treasure. i like it. a hand-forged iron chain found near the potentially 500-year-old stone road? could gary be correct that it may have been used to unload valuable cargo from a ship and onto oak island long ago? okay, mate, i\'ll recheck the pile, see if we get any more finds. okay. we have got something else in here. oh, look at that oak. we got an oak. that looks like an oldie. that\'s like a crude oak. we hope that emma can say how old that is. 	CoOI S11E9.6
that looks like an oldie. that\'s like a crude oak. we hope that emma can say how old that is. yeah, and so this might be a sign of great things to come, because whatever they was all in this chain broke, and it might still be in the dig. let\'s keep our fingers crossed and keep looking. ok, mate. we found some really good artifacts that speaks to moving some very heavy things in this area. and it also speaks to the amount of work that was being done in the island. of course, i would hope that maybe this is related to the oak island mystery. 	CoOI S11E9.6
of course, i would hope that maybe this is related to the oak island mystery. little blippy blop, but nothing big. i\'ll put this to one side. yeah. okey-doke. anyway, so i think you\'re right. if it extends, it\'s got to come through here. hey, steve. hey, rick. we\'re trying to figure out if the road pushes out further, right? yep. but in order to figure out where we lay in relationship to that, you need to tell me where we are at the top of that stone. i can do that. in order to help determine if they have indeed found a new section of the stone road, surveyor steve guptill is using his topcon hyper 2 gps receiver to measure and compare the elevation of the newly uncovered stone feature with that of the stone road. 	CoOI S11E9.6
2 gps receiver to measure and compare the elevation of the newly uncovered stone feature with that of the stone road. all right, so the elevation here actually works, rick. so we have a 2% slope, the highest point being closest to land, sloping southward, decreasing towards the ocean. so the slope would work here. if that has anything to do with the stone road. that\'s right. but is it related? we\'d have to dig some more. yeah. well, the other thing, too, is you can see this flare. yep. why the flare? i don\'t know. my thought is you have a wagon or an oxen come down there, and this is a turnaround. 	CoOI S11E9.6
my thought is you have a wagon or an oxen come down there, and this is a turnaround. yep. if oxen were used to offload a ship or pull heavy loads, they would have to turn around, thus the need for the flare in the road. this shows that there was a tremendous amount of work done on the island, perhaps to conceal and hide something. so bill, pull that back a little bit, if you would, see if we see anything else. right. and then keep gary busy. all right. there are no answers till you start digging. that\'s right. 	CoOI S11E9.6
two of the new arrivals on season 10 of curse of oak island (cooi) are the stone well down by the shoreline that the team claims is 900 years old, and what the team are calling the blob, an area near the garden shaft that is supposed to be the source of the gold and silver found in some of the groundwater samples. now, the team are also claiming that traces of copper, tin, and zinc in the blobs groundwater could be indications that the treasure contains relics. let`s evaluate those two claims, and see what we know and what we dont know about them. 	Costopoulos "Is there a 900 year old well on the island, and are there relics in the Blob?" March 3, 2023
let`s evaluate those two claims, and see what we know and what we dont know about them. the well over the past few episodes, laird and the archaeology team have been excavating a stone-lined pit feature very near the shore of the island, which seems to be located in some wetlands that look like they are periodically flooded by the sea. the well. photo courtesy of reddit user stormbash this is actually a very interesting feature, and i hope we find out more about it. the cooi team (not the archaeology team, as far as i know) gives a date for the well about 1100 ad, or about 900 years ago. 	Costopoulos "Is there a 900 year old well on the island, and are there relics in the Blob?" March 3, 2023
archaeology team, as far as i know) gives a date for the well about 1100 ad, or about 900 years ago. this is based on a carbon date. however, from what i understand, the date was taken on a twig found at the bottom of the pit. dating pit features is notoriously difficult. as you dig a pit, you expose older and older surfaces. so material found at the bottom of a pit doesnt tell you much about the age of the pit itself. it just tells you the age of the oldest layer you uncovered while digging your pit. even worse, once the pit is dug, things can fall into it. 	Costopoulos "Is there a 900 year old well on the island, and are there relics in the Blob?" March 3, 2023
even worse, once the pit is dug, things can fall into it. they can accumulate at the bottom, which gives you a strange collection of ages if you start dating everything you find in there. in a place like oak island, which is heavily disturbed, dug up, and churned all over, materials of all kinds of ages can end up on the surface, and can then fall into the bottom of a pit. the most promising approach for dating a pit is to date material that is in the layer from which the pit originates, i.e. the ground surface at the time the pit was dug in the first place, hopefully from the top of the wall of the pit itself, but somewhere close will help too. 	Costopoulos "Is there a 900 year old well on the island, and are there relics in the Blob?" March 3, 2023
in the first place, hopefully from the top of the wall of the pit itself, but somewhere close will help too. unfortunately, this particular pit seems to originate at the present-day surface. so if it was dug a long time ago, it has been maintained since, which would make it difficult to date. if you have to dig through 30 cm of ground and then you start finding an old pit, you have a hope of dating it. based on the information presented on the show, we cant say with any kind of certainty that the pit is 900 years old. 	Costopoulos "Is there a 900 year old well on the island, and are there relics in the Blob?" March 3, 2023
the information presented on the show, we cant say with any kind of certainty that the pit is 900 years old. it could be 900 years old, but no evidence has been presented on the show that it actually is. but is it a well? it could be. it could be all kinds of other stuff. i hope some day we get better data from the actual archaeological reports that will come out of this project. in the meantime, with the information available to us, all i can say with confidence is that it is a stone-lined pit that fills with water, and that its age is undetermined. 	Costopoulos "Is there a 900 year old well on the island, and are there relics in the Blob?" March 3, 2023
can say with confidence is that it is a stone-lined pit that fills with water, and that its age is undetermined. the blob in season 10, an area just off the garden shaft has been presented as the source of the various gold and silver anomalies in the ground water on oak island. i have already commented on those anomalies. in my opinion, no information has been presented on the show to suggest that the gold and silver concentrations are above normal background levels. now the team have doubled down on this and suggested that there are also elevated values of copper, tin, and zinc in the groundwater of the blob. 	Costopoulos "Is there a 900 year old well on the island, and are there relics in the Blob?" March 3, 2023
on this and suggested that there are also elevated values of copper, tin, and zinc in the groundwater of the blob. as far as i know, they have not presented actual concentrations, so i am unable to evaluate that claim. they have said that this could suggest that the treasure contains not only gold and silver pieces, but also relics and other artefacts. that is one of the key differences between a science project and what they are doing on oak island. in academic science, we try to evaluate claims, and we share all the information we think our audience will need to evaluate our claims for themselves. 	Costopoulos "Is there a 900 year old well on the island, and are there relics in the Blob?" March 3, 2023
to evaluate claims, and we share all the information we think our audience will need to evaluate our claims for themselves. sometimes we forget something, or we dont think of providing a piece of information, or we just get the interpretation plain wrong. our colleagues evaluate our claims and ask for any additional information they might need. we provide it if we have it, and if we dont, we try to get it. that doesnt happen on a show like cooi, so it is often impossible to evaluate their claims. trust me, bro is not a step in the scientific method. 	Costopoulos "Is there a 900 year old well on the island, and are there relics in the Blob?" March 3, 2023
trust me, bro is not a step in the scientific method. in this case, even if it turns out to be true that there are elevated levels of copper, tin, and zinc in the blob, there would be at least one alternative explanation other than the presence of relics in a treasure chamber. people have been famously searching for treasure on oak island for at least 150 years, and perhaps a bit more. much of that searcher activity involved copper and zinc fittings for building shafts, boilers, and all kinds of other implements made of tin bronze and brass. the cooi team have themselves recovered a number of those pieces all over the money pit area and the blob. 	Costopoulos "Is there a 900 year old well on the island, and are there relics in the Blob?" March 3, 2023
the cooi team have themselves recovered a number of those pieces all over the money pit area and the blob. all these have been churned along with the rest of the island, and much of that stuff is still underground in collapsed tunnels, pits, and shafts. because it is a simpler and more likely explanation than a hidden treasure, i would want to rule that out as a source for the claimed anomalies before doing anything else on that front. thats another important characteristic of the work we do. we try to think of alternatives to our claims and explanations, and we try to rule those out. 	Costopoulos "Is there a 900 year old well on the island, and are there relics in the Blob?" March 3, 2023
weve learned some interesting things in the first few episodes of curse of oak island this season. ill go through the most significant, from my perspective as an archaeologist. bones a couple of years ago, the curse of oak island (cooi) team recovered 2 fragments of bone from their drilling in the money pit area. these were initially identified as human, with one showing european ancestry, and the other tied to the middle-east. at the time, we didnt get much information about the analysis itself. in the 25 top moments you never saw, we get some very interesting additional information. in one of the clips, someone from wyndham forensic group in guelph, ontario, tells us that they have analyzed dna samples already in solution, and that sample 3 of 9 contains human dna. 	Costopoulos "bones and swages"  November 20, 201
ontario, tells us that they have analyzed dna samples already in solution, and that sample 3 of 9 contains human dna. lets work out the implications of the very carefully measured language used by the wyndham rep. that the dna was already in solution when received at wyndham means that it was extracted from the bone and purified elsewhere. they received little phials that possibly contained dna extracted from the bone. wyndham then analyzed the liquid, probably looking specifically for human dna. they found human female dna in one of the nine samples they analyzed. what she doesnt tell us is equally interesting. 	Costopoulos "bones and swages"  November 20, 201
what she doesnt tell us is equally interesting. we dont know whether they looked for other dna than human. we dont know what method they used, although the most likely is pcr. that method allows you to find the kind of dna (human, bear, whale) etc that you are looking for, even if it is in tiny quantities, but it is not good at finding dna youre not looking for. if you use a human primer, you will find human dna if there is any. you wont necessarily find any other kind of dna. in other words, if there was non-human dna in the samples, we might not know it. 	Costopoulos "bones and swages"  November 20, 201
in other words, if there was non-human dna in the samples, we might not know it. the fact that she specifies that one sample contains human dna strongly points to contamination. contamination is a huge problem in dna studies. ancient dna labs take all kinds of extreme measures to avoid it, and it is still one of their main problems. if you are looking for, say, bear dna from a bone sample, contamination by human dna is less of a problem. it is unlikely that the sample will be accidentally contaminated by bear dna, unless someone had bear steak for lunch in that lab that day. 	Costopoulos "bones and swages"  November 20, 201
the sample will be accidentally contaminated by bear dna, unless someone had bear steak for lunch in that lab that day. but if you have a bone that you know is from a bear, and extract a dna sample from it, you might very well find human dna in it also. that normally isnt a problem, because youre not interested in the human dna, only in the bear. when dealing with an unknown, especially if you are looking for human dna, the contamination issue becomes extremely significant and problematic. humans extracted the dna sample, and therefore, contamination is sometimes difficult to rule out. 	Costopoulos "bones and swages"  November 20, 201
humans extracted the dna sample, and therefore, contamination is sometimes difficult to rule out. at this point, i really dont have enough information to evaluate the claim that the money pit bones are human, but i strongly suspect that the human dna wyndham found is from contamination. i would want to rule that out before i accept the claim. the bones could be human, but at this point, there is a high probability that they are not. a good research project gives details of its methods, assumptions, etc, so that its audience can have the tools to properly evaluate its claims. 	Costopoulos "bones and swages"  November 20, 201
project gives details of its methods, assumptions, etc, so that its audience can have the tools to properly evaluate its claims. so far, the cooi team has not done very much of that, and certainly not in the case of this bone analysis. swages in last weeks episode (core values), the team recovers two iron objects from the western end of the island (lot 21 area). these are initially identified as hammers by metal detectorist gary drayton, but later specified as swages (swage hammers?) by guest analyst carmen legge he claims that these are rare finds, that they could date from the 14th century, and that they suggest intensive drilling and mining operations on the island. 	Costopoulos "bones and swages"  November 20, 201
finds, that they could date from the 14th century, and that they suggest intensive drilling and mining operations on the island. lets take those claims one by one. swages are blacksmiths tools used to form iron into predetermined shapes. whether these are simply hammers, or whether they are swage hammers is very uncertain from the pictures shown. the objects both have clear hafting holes and were probably used as hammers, swage or not. the v-shape at the end of one of the objects, which legge argues makes it a swage hammer, seems at first sight to be the result of use-wear or breakage, rather than a design feature. 	Costopoulos "bones and swages"  November 20, 201
it a swage hammer, seems at first sight to be the result of use-wear or breakage, rather than a design feature. it seems to be absent from the other one. regardless, this is not terribly important. the claim that swages and swage hammers are rare finds is surprising. they are very durable, large, and heavy, which means they are easily found by archaeologists. they have been used daily in every smith shop for millennia, which means there is a lot of them around. just for interest, here is pdf of matthew carters archaeology masters thesis from memorial university on the excavation of a 17th century blacksmith shop in nearby newfoundland. 	Costopoulos "bones and swages"  November 20, 201
of matthew carters archaeology masters thesis from memorial university on the excavation of a 17th century blacksmith shop in nearby newfoundland. the presence of swages and hammers in an area suggests a blacksmith shop. they certainly dont by themselves, suggest intensive drilling and mining operations. nothing inherently ties hammers and swages to drilling and mining, and nothing inherently ties blacksmithing to drilling and mining. that claim is very weak, just on its face. i would hope that on the basis of the hammer finds, the team (especially laird), has looked at that area in more detail to see if it is a blacksmith shop. 	Costopoulos "bones and swages"  November 20, 201
finds, the team (especially laird), has looked at that area in more detail to see if it is a blacksmith shop. it is difficult to tell from the images shown on television, but, the ground seemed very disturbed where the hammers were recovered. perhaps that means it was already surveyed and or/excavated? the claim that the hammers could be from the 14th century is one of those classic could it be moments of pseudoarchaeology. yes, similar tools were used in the 14th century, but they were also used in the 18th century, from which most of the archaeologically visible activity on the island seems to date (not surprisingly). 	Costopoulos "bones and swages"  November 20, 201
the coconut fiber most recently highlighted on s07 e15 (surely templar) of curse of oak island has long been discussed as a surprising find that requires some rethinking of local history. why would coconut fiber end up in an archaeological context on an island in nova scotia, far from any area where it naturally occurs? could it be that it is related to the burying of a treasure on the island, and to the building of the box drains that feed the flood tunnels that protect the money pit? in order to determine how interesting or significant the find of coconut fiber on oak island might be, we first have to see whether it is surprising in the first place. 	Costopoulos "Just how surprising is the coconut fiber?"  March 10, 2020
of coconut fiber on oak island might be, we first have to see whether it is surprising in the first place. so just how rare is coconut in archaeological sites of comparable age in northeastern north america? it turns out that isnt very surprising at all. coconut in the local archaeological record from a bit of very quick looking around in the archaeological literature, it is clear that coconuts were circulating quite widely in all of northeastern north america by the middle of the 19th century, and that they were available and used inland as early as the 17th century. coconut shell shows up in an early 19th century archaeological site in nova scotia itself, at salters gate near the alexander keith brewery (macintyre and davis 2006:24). 	Costopoulos "Just how surprising is the coconut fiber?"  March 10, 2020
early 19th century archaeological site in nova scotia itself, at salters gate near the alexander keith brewery (macintyre and davis 2006:24). by the mid-19th century, coconut was widely available in north america as far away as toronto, and apparently not considered a luxury good. coconuts were well-known in toronto from the mid-nineteenth century onward, and merchants advertised in the newspapers for both whole coconuts and processed forms as specialty items (driver 2018:59). archaeologists have reported coconut fiber dating from the 17th and 18th century, and coconut husk dating from the 18th century in a site in albany, new york (huey 2018:44). 	Costopoulos "Just how surprising is the coconut fiber?"  March 10, 2020
17th and 18th century, and coconut husk dating from the 18th century in a site in albany, new york (huey 2018:44). albany is not exactly ocean front property. it is a good 150 km up the hudson river from the ocean. it also isnt any more tropical than oak island. fairly conclusive demonstration that coconuts were not unusual or luxurious on the eastern seaboard comes from the fact that in the 19th century, a flour mill at old place neck on staten island in new york was modified to process coconut shells and iron ore for use in paint pigment (palinc, n.d.:11). 	Costopoulos "Just how surprising is the coconut fiber?"  March 10, 2020
staten island in new york was modified to process coconut shells and iron ore for use in paint pigment (palinc, n.d.:11). in an archaeological report on a complex in upper west side manhattan that mostly covers the period from the 1870s to early 20th century, and co-authored by eva hulse, with whom i worked for several years, a whole section is dedicated to the analysis of the coconut finds. even though, according to the report, the coconuts would have needed to be transported very long distances to be consumed, the coconut was not a stranger to the citizens of manhattan (turck et al 2016:94). 	Costopoulos "Just how surprising is the coconut fiber?"  March 10, 2020
very long distances to be consumed, the coconut was not a stranger to the citizens of manhattan (turck et al 2016:94). the report goes on to note that there were 174 shipments of coconut into new york harbour in 1872 alone, and about 8 million coconuts in total. the sheer number cited above suggests that coconuts were not exactly rare commodities (:94). why coconut on oak island? the presence of coconut on oak island is therefore not surprising. that still leaves us, though, with the very interesting question of what it was used for in that place and at that time, especially the fiber. 	Costopoulos "Just how surprising is the coconut fiber?"  March 10, 2020
with the very interesting question of what it was used for in that place and at that time, especially the fiber. even if we limit ourselves to what is shown on curse of oak island, we know that there is plenty of farming and light industry on the island starting in the mid-18th century, not to mention the massive searcher activity that picks up in the mid-19th century, that culminates in the mid-20th. coconut fiber has a number of commercial applications, that range from ship-building and repair, which likely happened on the island, to insulation, and rope production. rope production from coconut fiber was important in the 19th century, and some of it was even made in the uk. 	Costopoulos "Just how surprising is the coconut fiber?"  March 10, 2020
rope production from coconut fiber was important in the 19th century, and some of it was even made in the uk. is it possible, then, that the coconut fiber found on oak island is from rope used in farming, light industry, and searcher activity from the 18th to the 20th century? why yes, it certainly is possible. is it possible that templar knights who buried a fantastic treasure on oak island in the 14th century left it there? that is also possible. but i will venture to say that it isnt quite as probable as the first possibility. i will let you decide whether the balance of probabilities is closer to 51/49 or to 99.9/0.1. 	Costopoulos "Just how surprising is the coconut fiber?"  March 10, 2020
i will let you decide whether the balance of probabilities is closer to 51/49 or to 99.9/0.1. given the information available at the moment, i am closer to the 99.9/0.1 end of the spectrum. references driver e 2018. coconuts in the latrines! in martelle h, m mcclelland, t taylor, j lorinc (eds). huey pr 2018. annotated bibliography of new netherland archaeology, new netherland institute https://www.newnetherlandinstitute.org/files/9615/2357/6324/new_netherland_archeology_annotated_bibliography_-_march_2018.pdf macintyre ad, sa davis 2006. salters gate: archaeological resource impact assessment final report, http://library2.smu.ca/handle/01/26882#.xmztjqhkiul public archaeology laboratory (palinc) n.d. new discoveries at old place: the story of the old place neck site, staten island, new york. 	Costopoulos "Just how surprising is the coconut fiber?"  March 10, 2020
s10e2 and s10e3 of the curse of oak island (cooi) devote some time to the finding and analysis of a rectangular piece of copper. having dabbled over the years in the early history and archaeology of metallurgy, this one was immediately intriguing to me. the cooi team initially hoped it was some kind of coin. after showing it to a numismatics expert, they have settled for the weaker possibility that it might be some kind of trade token. the copper object, from the curse of oak island season 10 when i first saw it, i was hoping it might be something like that. 	Costopoulos "Did they find an ancient rectangular copper trade token?"  December 5, 2022
the curse of oak island season 10 when i first saw it, i was hoping it might be something like that. it wasnt unusual for indigenous populations in northeastern north america, starting in the late 1500s, to trade for copper and bronze kettles and pots, and to cut them up and flatten them into sheets, which could then be either traded, or shaped into tools, or rolled into tinkling cones, for example, for ceremonial dance outfits. the resulting material was widely traded. lets review what we know about his object, in archaeological terms. composition the team, encouraged by the numismatics expert, are hoping that the object is old, perhaps dating back to the fifteen hundreds. 	Costopoulos "Did they find an ancient rectangular copper trade token?"  December 5, 2022
the team, encouraged by the numismatics expert, are hoping that the object is old, perhaps dating back to the fifteen hundreds. the composition shown on screen in the episode is about 83% copper, 7% tin, 3% lead, 1.5% zinc, and 0.45% arsenic. given that they are analyzing the surface with an energy dispersive spectrometer, and that the surface is corroded, uneven, and somewhat contaminated, all of which affect readings, these numbers have to be considered approximate, but they are still pretty good. one of the experts calls this arsenical bronze, and says that it stopped being made a long time ago, suggesting that the metal may be very old. 	Costopoulos "Did they find an ancient rectangular copper trade token?"  December 5, 2022
arsenical bronze, and says that it stopped being made a long time ago, suggesting that the metal may be very old. in fact, concentrations under 0.5% arsenic in copper alloys are usually considered to be from the ore itself, and not added intentionally. some sources of ore around the world can contain as much as 1% or more arsenic naturally. so this particular alloy is right on the cusp, and i would tend to consider the arsenic in this one as naturally occurring. this impression is reinforced by the fact that the rest of the composition is remarkably close to what is called admiralty gunmetal, or sometimes red brass. 	Costopoulos "Did they find an ancient rectangular copper trade token?"  December 5, 2022
the fact that the rest of the composition is remarkably close to what is called admiralty gunmetal, or sometimes red brass. the nominal composition of gunmetal is 88% copper, 10% tin, and 2% zinc. this is very, very close to the composition of our object. modern admiralty gunmetal started being made in the mid-eighteen hundreds, and has been used ever since because of both its strength and its resistance to corrosion in marine environments. in fact its zinc content makes it into a kind of low zinc brass. the intriguing part of this one is the 3% lead, which is usually added to make metals more malleable, so that is a mystery to be solved here. 	Costopoulos "Did they find an ancient rectangular copper trade token?"  December 5, 2022
the 3% lead, which is usually added to make metals more malleable, so that is a mystery to be solved here. either the lead is an unintentional contaminant in the manufacture of the gunmetal, or it contaminated the surface later during the use life of the object, or after it was discarded. the lead could even be a phantom peak on the graph, caused by conditions of observation. ive seen it happen. gunmetal has typically been used in ship building, boilers, gears, or anything that requires both strength and corrosion resistance. morphology the shape of the object is interesting. as the numismatics expert notes, it is tapered. 	Costopoulos "Did they find an ancient rectangular copper trade token?"  December 5, 2022
morphology the shape of the object is interesting. as the numismatics expert notes, it is tapered. i also note that it has notches along two sides, almost like serrations. these are sometimes added to edges to increase their effective length, and therefore their cutting potential. if this was a stone flake, for example, i would have no trouble concluding that it was retouched to create a cutting edge. in this case, it is entirely possible that a piece of a broken boiler or something was reshaped and reused for other purposes, and then discarded when no longer needed, or simply lost. 	Costopoulos "Did they find an ancient rectangular copper trade token?"  December 5, 2022
broken boiler or something was reshaped and reused for other purposes, and then discarded when no longer needed, or simply lost. the team makes a big deal of the fact that the object weighs 4 grams on the nose. it suggests to them that it might have been some kind of standardized trade token. this is interesting. but if the object is a trade token from the fifteen hundreds, the fact that it weighs precisely 4 grams would be a meaningless coincidence, since grams were designed by the french academy in the 1790s. then there is the fact that it would have been lying there for hundreds of years, losing mass over time through corrosion and erosion, meaning that it would likely have originally been over four grams. 	Costopoulos "Did they find an ancient rectangular copper trade token?"  December 5, 2022
since the broadcast of s9e15 of the curse of oak island (cooi), much has been made of the recovery of a rubber boot in the first big can core. the goal of putting down a core with a 10 foot diameter was of course to find evidence of the money pit, and hopefully the treasure buried there some time before 1795. it shouldnt have been encouraging, therefore, when the first significant find to come up turned out to be an old rubber boot. well, perhaps not actually rubber, and we will come back to that in a minute. the boot (figure 1) was identified by a manufacturers mark as having been made by kaufman footwear, a canadian company based in kitchener (formerly berlin), ontario, and that was in operation from 1907 until 2000. 	Costopoulos "Have they found FDRs rubber boot?" March 7, 2022
by kaufman footwear, a canadian company based in kitchener (formerly berlin), ontario, and that was in operation from 1907 until 2000. one of its brands, sorel, lives on under different ownership, and is still well known in canada. figure 1: the rubber boot recovered in the first 10 foot can, and claimed to be possibly associate with the 1909 searchers and perhaps fdr himself the cooi team was quick to point out that one of the many searcher expeditions to oak island ran from 1909 to 1912, and involved future us president franklin delano roosevelt (fdr). using their now familiar possibilist reasoning, they suggested that it was therefore possible that the boot was associate with the 1909 work (kaufman had been producing rubber footwear for a about year by then), and that it was even possible that the boot was used by fdr himself during the expedition. 	Costopoulos "Have they found FDRs rubber boot?" March 7, 2022
about year by then), and that it was even possible that the boot was used by fdr himself during the expedition. while encouraging in a way, i suppose, even if all this was true, it wouldnt get us any closer to a treasure. but lets evaluate the claim. first, given the information volunteered by the cooi team, it is impossible to say whether this boot is associated with fdr, or with some other searcher from that expedition, or a later one. second, two factors lead me to strongly doubt this specific claim. 1) the boot material is very thin, like a film, very pliable, and very shiny. 	Costopoulos "Have they found FDRs rubber boot?" March 7, 2022
1) the boot material is very thin, like a film, very pliable, and very shiny. it seems more like vinyl than like rubber. kaufman began making pvc (vinyl) footwear in the mid-1950s, and this wasnt available at the time of the 1909 searcher expeditions. if it really is pvc, it is not fdrs boot. 2) the reinforced rubber red band that covers the toe of the boot is a feature that i remember well from the kaufman rubber boots of my childhood in the 1970s. together, these two factors strongly suggest a later boot. figure 2: kaufman boots from the 1912 catalogue. 	Costopoulos "Have they found FDRs rubber boot?" March 7, 2022
together, these two factors strongly suggest a later boot. figure 2: kaufman boots from the 1912 catalogue. note that the reinforcement at the toe is different from the example found by the cooi team this 1912 kaufman catalogue from the internet archive, linked through this fashion history blog, shows that early kaufman boots were stylistically quite different (figure 2) from the one recovered by the cooi team. archaeologists often use style as an element for dating objects, or at least for putting them in chronological sequences (known as seriation), and to this archaeologist, the recovered boot looks much more like post-1950s kaufman boots than earlier ones. 	Costopoulos "Have they found FDRs rubber boot?" March 7, 2022
sequences (known as seriation), and to this archaeologist, the recovered boot looks much more like post-1950s kaufman boots than earlier ones. if anyone wants to do additional research on this and nail down the exact chronological range of that model, the university of waterloo (right next to kitchener, seems to have a pretty full set of kaufman catalogues. if we were to look for a searcher expedition with which to associate the boot, it would make a lot more sense to look at the dunfield expedition, which dug a very deep and wide conical hole in the money pit area around 1965. 	Costopoulos "Have they found FDRs rubber boot?" March 7, 2022
look at the dunfield expedition, which dug a very deep and wide conical hole in the money pit area around 1965. the boot fits the date, and the nature of the activity does also. while looking for the treasure, dunfield essentially dug a huge hole in the ground and then backfilled it. it seems likely that a stray rubber boot could have been part of the backfill, along with much of the wood and other material recovered in the big cans so far. in summary, if we only consider the information that some kaufman boots were available in 1909, it is possible that the boot is from the 1909 searcher expedition. 	Costopoulos "Have they found FDRs rubber boot?" March 7, 2022
information that some kaufman boots were available in 1909, it is possible that the boot is from the 1909 searcher expedition. it is even possible that it belonged to fdr. however, even adding a tiny bit of information, such as the apparent composition of the boot and its stylistic attributes makes this either impossible (if it really is pvc), or at least exceedingly unlikely (on stylistic grounds alone). in addition, there is a much more likely explanation that fits the available evidence much better. we could likely rule out the fdr connection decisively, and evaluate the dunfield connection by looking in more detail at the kaufman catalogues available in waterloo. 	Costopoulos "Have they found FDRs rubber boot?" March 7, 2022
beads have been very important to north american indigenous populations for a very long time. the augustine mound, for example, is a burial site almost 3000 years old in new brunswick, not very far from oak island, that contains over a thousand copper beads. the late tricia jarratt did a comprehensive study of them in her outstanding 2013 ma thesis. slightly further afield, more thousands of beads, both copper and shell, come from approximately contemporary boucher site in swanton, vermont, right on the qubec border (this last link contains photos of ancestral remains). when europeans showed up, beads continued to be important as an exchange medium, and as symbolic and ritual objects. 	Costopoulos "The glass bead from Lot 5" January 26, 2024
when europeans showed up, beads continued to be important as an exchange medium, and as symbolic and ritual objects. european glass beads now supplemented traditional copper, stone, and shell beads. so it isnt surprising that the oak island team has found a bead associated with the (probably) late 17th or early 18th century pit structure on lot 5. in fact, i wouldnt be surprised at all if they found other beads all over the island over the years. there are sometimes hundreds of them even in a test unit. this one just happens to be nice and presentable. beads can be very helpful for archaeologists. 	Costopoulos "The glass bead from Lot 5" January 26, 2024
this one just happens to be nice and presentable. beads can be very helpful for archaeologists. some types of beads help us narrow down the date range of a site, and their chemical composition can help us understand ancient trade networks, and technological and economic organization. beads were important to the people who made, traded and used them a long time ago, and they are important and exciting finds for archaeologists in the present as well. the bead from lot 5 beads are usually classified according to their manufacturing process, shape, and decoration. kidd and kidd developed a typology often used by archaeologists. 	Costopoulos "The glass bead from Lot 5" January 26, 2024
kidd and kidd developed a typology often used by archaeologists. i am far from a bead expert, but the lot 5 bead looks to me like it could be what kidd and kidd call a type iib31. these are cut up and sometimes reshaped from long tubular beads. it could be another type, but if so, the same thoughts apply slightly modified. a type iib31 bead from york factory, manitoba, from karlins and adams 2013 unfortunately, that type of bead is found in sites that are as old as the tunica treasure from the mid-1700s, or as recent as an early 20th century context at york factory, manitoba (see picture above). 	Costopoulos "The glass bead from Lot 5" January 26, 2024
tunica treasure from the mid-1700s, or as recent as an early 20th century context at york factory, manitoba (see picture above). they can also be identified in onondaga sites from the late 1500s to the mid-1600s (bradley 2005). this qubec ministry of culture site says type iib31 beads were manufactured and exchanged between the 16th and the 19th centuries. in other words, if this is indeed a iib31, the bead isnt very helpful for nailing down a date just by looking at its type. perhaps the chemistry can tell us a bit more, but that information hasnt yet been shared on the show. 	Costopoulos "The glass bead from Lot 5" January 26, 2024
perhaps the chemistry can tell us a bit more, but that information hasnt yet been shared on the show. for example, shugar and oconnor found change over time in the chemistry of glass beads recovered from fort niagara in an 18th century context. chemistry can also help us figure out where the beads were made (whether holland, italy, france, etc), and which trade networks the people who handled them were involved in. so all in all, a great find, potentially very informative, and i am glad they featured it on the show. eventually, an excavation report will tell us a bit more. 	Costopoulos "The glass bead from Lot 5" January 26, 2024
eventually, an excavation report will tell us a bit more. but as with the rest of the archaeological finds from oak island, it doesnt move us closer to a templar treasure. references bradley jw 2005. evolution of the onondaga iroquois: accommodating change, 1500-1655, university of nebraska press. brain jp 1981. glass beads from the tunica treasure, peabody museum, harvard university. https://rla.unc.edu/archives/lmsfiles/lms%20bulletin%2007.pdf jarratt tl 2013. the augustine mound copper sub-assemblage: beyond the bead, masters thesis, university of new brunswick. https://www.academia.edu/download/37466737/the_am_copper_sa_-_beyond_the_bead.pdf heckenberger mj, jb petersen, la basa, er cowie, ae spiess, re stuckenrath 1990. archaeology of eastern north america 18: 109- 144. https://www.jstor.org/stable/40914322 karlins k and gf adams 2013. 	Costopoulos "The glass bead from Lot 5" January 26, 2024
the curse of oak island (cooi) s10e06 brought us one of the more interesting finds of the team in a long time. as an archaeologist, i am of course interested in old ox shoes and random fragments of stoves dumped in fill. we can learn a lot from those, from their spatial distribution, from their associations, etc. but i must admit that even i breathe a sigh of relief when something like last weeks decorated copper plate comes out of one of garys excursions. the decorated copper object so what is that thing? as always, we only know what they show us on cooi. 	Costopoulos "Is the decorated copper object a gorget?"  December 26, 2022
the decorated copper object so what is that thing? as always, we only know what they show us on cooi. it is a metal sheet, about 95% copper and 5% zinc, which makes it brass, it is folded, and has quite intricate designs that seem to be repouss. laird says his first thought is that it is military. my first thought is closely related to that also. this is pure speculation here, but i think it might be a gorget, which is an ornament worn around the neck, sometimes over the throat (hence the name from the french for throat: gorge). 	Costopoulos "Is the decorated copper object a gorget?"  December 26, 2022
which is an ornament worn around the neck, sometimes over the throat (hence the name from the french for throat: gorge). these were often part of european military uniforms, and also worn by north american indigenous warriors. the british gave gorgets to their mikmaw allies at the end of the war of 1812, for example. the decoration on this one suggests an indigenous origin more than european one. a caddoan mississippian culture craig style shell gorget from the spiro mounds site in eastern oklahoma. indigenous gorgets have been made and used for thousands of years. they were originally made of bone, slate, or sometimes native copper (i.e. 	Costopoulos "Is the decorated copper object a gorget?"  December 26, 2022
they were originally made of bone, slate, or sometimes native copper (i.e. copper found in metallic form in nature). they were important symbols of status and were often elaborately decorated. but while the decoration on this one is more indigenous than european, the composition of the metal suggests that it comes from a european source, and is therefore no older than the 1500s. indigenous people have worked copper in the americas for thousands of years, but i am not aware of any brass being produced, and native, or naturally occurring brass alloys dont seem to occur in the deposits that were exploited in the great lakes region, for example. 	Costopoulos "Is the decorated copper object a gorget?"  December 26, 2022
naturally occurring brass alloys dont seem to occur in the deposits that were exploited in the great lakes region, for example. the object could be cut from a trade kettle. these were copper or brass kettles exchanged by european traders to indigenous groups starting in the 1500s. anselmi et al. found some brass trade kettles in ontario with as low as 6% zinc content. meanwhile, pavlish et al. strongly suggest that brass becomes more frequent relative to copper in archaeological sites in the northeast as time progresses. brass is almost absent in the 1500s, and becomes dominant in the mid 1600s, which would help us date this thing if it is indeed a reworked piece of a trade kettle. 	Costopoulos "Is the decorated copper object a gorget?"  December 26, 2022
the mid 1600s, which would help us date this thing if it is indeed a reworked piece of a trade kettle. trade kettles were often cut up and reworked like that into ornaments, tinkling cones for dancing outfits, tools, etc. when laird said that the object was folded over, i immediately thought of the lugs of brass trade kettles, which were often folded. but then laird specified that it is folded three times over, which i think would be unusual for a simple kettle lug. another possibility is that the object is made of gilding metal, sometimes known as pinchbeck, which has a very similar composition, and is prized for its resemblance to gold. 	Costopoulos "Is the decorated copper object a gorget?"  December 26, 2022
of gilding metal, sometimes known as pinchbeck, which has a very similar composition, and is prized for its resemblance to gold. it was used for ornaments, plates, and things like military badges. it was manufactured in the uk starting in the early 1700s. unfortunately, the decoration on the object is of little help for either dating it or pinning down its origin. as ed barnhart appropriately notes on the episode, geometry is everywhere. people have used it in all kinds of places, at all kinds of time, for all kinds of purposes. his inclusion as an expert on the show suggests that the cooi team might be thinking of giving this object a central american origin. 	Costopoulos "Is the decorated copper object a gorget?"  December 26, 2022
an expert on the show suggests that the cooi team might be thinking of giving this object a central american origin. well see where they go with this. if i had to take a wild guess right now, based only on the information i saw on the episode, i would say that the object is probably a mikmaw gorget, probably made from trade brass, probably in the late 1700s. but who really knows? it could also be a small piece of a larger object that we would recognize immediately if we saw it in its context. all we have to go on is what we have. 	Costopoulos "Is the decorated copper object a gorget?"  December 26, 2022
seasons 9 and 10 of the curse of oak island (cooi) make a big deal of the duc danvilles fairly disastrous 1746 naval expedition to nova scotia. the cooi team speculate that the expedition might have been a cover for sending a great treasure to oak island and burying it in what became the money pit. i will have more to say about the expedition and the stories that surround it in a future post. in the meantime, the fairview historical society has a pretty comprehensive and informative post on the expedition and all the legends it spawned, including buried treasure (but not on oak island, and not the ark of the covenant). 	Costopoulos "letter from the commander of the Castor and the Aurore"  December 5, 2022
and all the legends it spawned, including buried treasure (but not on oak island, and not the ark of the covenant). in s10e03, the team presents the new possibility that an advance task force of two ships, the aurore and the castor (dawn and beaver) under the led by commander duvigneau would have been sent ahead of the main fleet to find oak island, prepare it, and perhaps even to bury the treasure itself. du vignans letter in support of this contention, the cooi team present a passage from a report duvigneau submitted to the french admiralty which they claim says: i will not speak to anyone about this place. 	Costopoulos "letter from the commander of the Castor and the Aurore"  December 5, 2022
a report duvigneau submitted to the french admiralty which they claim says: i will not speak to anyone about this place. i am obliged to send my journal of navigation. this secret place about which du vignan will speak to no one, of course, is supposed to be oak island and the money pit. now, lets look at what the letter actually says. including the partially cut off sentence at the top of the screen in one of the shots, the whole passage reads: who ask for nothing better than to fall under french dominion. i will not speak to anyone about this fact [or place, see below], but i have to warn you that it will be difficult to hide it from a great many people who know it. 	Costopoulos "letter from the commander of the Castor and the Aurore"  December 5, 2022
i have to warn you that it will be difficult to hide it from a great many people who know it. i send my navigation log. the frigate is beyond my expectations (or my hopes), she steers and goes well, especially at the closest [to the wind?], and if i had the advantage of commanding her, i find she carries sail well enough to take on canons of eight rather than six  so how the cooi team get from this that there is a secret place and that du vignan is compelled (obliged) to sent his log, but that he is keeping secrets from the admiralty? 	Costopoulos "letter from the commander of the Castor and the Aurore"  December 5, 2022
place and that du vignan is compelled (obliged) to sent his log, but that he is keeping secrets from the admiralty? the minor problem initially, i thought that they had misread the word fais (fact), but thanks to this redditor for pointing out that it is most likely pais (country, or region). pais doesnt fit the sentence quite as well, but looking at other p characters in the letter, especially in parleray point, it looks like a p. if the word is fais, or fact, it refers to the previous paragraphs statement that some unknown groups, persons, or settlements, would like to fall under french dominion. 	Costopoulos "letter from the commander of the Castor and the Aurore"  December 5, 2022
it refers to the previous paragraphs statement that some unknown groups, persons, or settlements, would like to fall under french dominion. this could refer to any number of groups, european or indigenous. if the word is pais, or region, it could refer to the places where people want to switch allegiance, or to the place where the ships of the expedition are to assemble. all of this information, regardless of which word it is, would be important strategic information during a time of war, and none of it needs to involve oak island. without seeing the whole letter, it is unfortunately difficult to interpret this. 	Costopoulos "letter from the commander of the Castor and the Aurore"  December 5, 2022
without seeing the whole letter, it is unfortunately difficult to interpret this. the major problem unfortunately, it is difficult to find a charitable explanation for the second part of their error. the cooi team takes the first part of one sentence (highlighted red on the show), which ends with i have to, or i am compelled to (je suis oblig de), they skip the part to which this refers, and go straight to the beginning of the next sentence, which reads i send my log, and which has nothing to do with the compelling. if you put the two highlighted sentence fragments together, they dont even make grammatical sense. 	Costopoulos "letter from the commander of the Castor and the Aurore"  December 5, 2022
if you put the two highlighted sentence fragments together, they dont even make grammatical sense. the compelling clearly refers to having to warn the admiralty of the information about groups seeking to change their political alignment or their alliances. thats very difficult to do by accident, and i would love to hear an explanation from the cooi team. i would also love to see the full letter, so i can get a better sense of the context. i always like to give people the benefit of the doubt, but this one is difficult to ignore. i must say, if an undergrad brought me a translation and textual reconstruction like that, i would not be amused. 	Costopoulos "letter from the commander of the Castor and the Aurore"  December 5, 2022
what is the paved area, and how old is it?in the season 7 finale of curse of oak island, the team reveals that wood recovered by ian spooner just below the stone pavement in the swamp area gave a radiocarbon date in the 13th century. a number of hypotheses have formed around the paved area, both on the show and in fan communities. some have suggested that it is merely the remains of a platform created by searcher fred nolan to bring a coring rig into the swamp. it has been speculated on the show that it may be a roadway built in relation to the exploitation of a possible clay mine which now forms the so-called eye of the swamp. 	Costopoulos "What is the paved area, and how old is it?" May 12, 2020
roadway built in relation to the exploitation of a possible clay mine which now forms the so-called eye of the swamp. fortified with a date in the 1200s, speculation has renewed that it may have been built by depositors, perhaps even templar knights, as part of their work to bury a treasure in the money pit. what do we actually know about the age of the stone pavement? archaeologically, what are some possible explanations, and how plausible are they? is the platform 800 years old? the date on the wood found just below the stone pavement, or perhaps embedded in it (not completely clear), is very interesting. 	Costopoulos "What is the paved area, and how old is it?" May 12, 2020
date on the wood found just below the stone pavement, or perhaps embedded in it (not completely clear), is very interesting. without seeing a clear stratigraphic profile of the find context, it is difficult to interpret it. at the very least, it means that the pavement is not older than the 1200s. either there is something just below it that dates from the 1200s, or something became embedded in its construction that is from the 1200s. in either case, the carbon date gives us a maximum age for the structure. the platform is no more than 800 years old. unfortunately, the date doesnt help us with another important question, which is: how young is the pavement? 	Costopoulos "What is the paved area, and how old is it?" May 12, 2020
unfortunately, the date doesnt help us with another important question, which is: how young is the pavement? we dont have a second date which overlies the pavement that would give us a bracket to securely date its construction. if, for example, another piece of wood recovered just above the pavement, in clear and secure depositional context, was dated to the 1400s, then we could say that the pavement dates from between the 1200s and the 1400s. unfortunately, we dont have that. right now, the bracket for the age of the pavement is sometime between the 1200s and the present. if during its construction, the ground was leveled, for example, or local materials were excavated from nearby and used for fill, it is very possible that the immediately underlying surface is from the 1200s, or that material from the 1200s is embedded in it. 	Costopoulos "What is the paved area, and how old is it?" May 12, 2020
very possible that the immediately underlying surface is from the 1200s, or that material from the 1200s is embedded in it. that would be true whether it was built in the 1200s or two weeks ago. some archaeological possibilities if the pavement is indeed 800 years old, then then most likely possibility is that it was built by indigenous groups. stone pavements are reported on the northeast atlantic coast that are as old as 6000 years (see the work of bill fitzhugh, for example). they tend to be associated with dwellings, and tend to be somewhat smaller than what we see on the show. 	Costopoulos "What is the paved area, and how old is it?" May 12, 2020
they tend to be associated with dwellings, and tend to be somewhat smaller than what we see on the show. still, old stone pavements are not unknown in the archaeological record of the area. starting in the 17th century, however, european fishermen built large numbers of stone pavements for drying and curing fish. these are very similar to the one found on oak island, and often involved preparation and leveling of ground, which could have exposed an underlying 13th century surface. page 100 of bryn tappers 2014 masters thesis describes the construction of the galet, one such type of stone pavement: at the beginning of each fishing season, crews often prepared natural cobble beach terraces along the shoreline by stripping them of vegetation, clearing them of material washed ashore or left behind by the previous seasons occupants and levelling any uneven ground (pope 2009a: 134; niellon 2010: 6). 	Costopoulos "What is the paved area, and how old is it?" May 12, 2020
washed ashore or left behind by the previous seasons occupants and levelling any uneven ground (pope 2009a: 134; niellon 2010: 6). while most galets are close to the shoreline, where drying space was at a premium, fishermen constructed ramps to access the higher ground of adjacent escarpments and coastal slopes on which they laid artificially constructed galets. this required them to gather considerable quantities of stone from the foreshore to set out in raised beds and pavements, sometimes retained at their edges with stone kerbing which also demarcated paths between them (eg. pope 2006: 40-41; pope et al. 2007: 7). this possibility that the pavement on oak island is a galet strikes me as very likely. 	Costopoulos "What is the paved area, and how old is it?" May 12, 2020
2007: 7). this possibility that the pavement on oak island is a galet strikes me as very likely. not only would it explain the stone platform, it would also explain why material from the 1200s is just underneath it. some of them even have a ramp. i would definitely want to rule this out before going any further. the other two main possibilities, of course, are not to be ignored. i am still not convinced that this is not the remains of nolans platform. i would like to see some work on ruling that one out. the clay mine road/platform sound intriguing as well, although we have very little information on that one. 	Costopoulos "What is the paved area, and how old is it?" May 12, 2020
this year, much of the curse of oak island focus has been on an apparently paved area in the swamp area. according to the shows speculations, this would have been created for transport of treasure to the original money pit. ian spooner, an environmental scientist from acadia university, who has worked with archaeologists in the past, was brought in to evaluate the paved area, and the formation of the swamp in general. his statements so far make it clear that there is indeed an area of the swamp which has a high concentration of rocks that is not the result of natural processes. 	Costopoulos "What do we know about the paved area in the swamp?" Feb 18, 2020
indeed an area of the swamp which has a high concentration of rocks that is not the result of natural processes. humans put them there. he clearly states that they are above the glacial till, and that they dont have the kind of clay coating one would expect from the natural layer. archaeologically, the next questions are obvious. in order of likelihood that we will find answers to them: when were they put there, how, why, and by whom. as of last weeks episode, there is some hope of answering the when, because spooner recovered some organic material embedded in the platform, which can potentially be carbon dated. 	Costopoulos "What do we know about the paved area in the swamp?" Feb 18, 2020
hope of answering the when, because spooner recovered some organic material embedded in the platform, which can potentially be carbon dated. the why and the whom are always elusive in archaeology. as always with oak island, or with any other pseudo-archaeology claims, it is certainly possible that a platform was built in the swamp in a remote past for the purpose of bringing a treasure to the money pit. however, there are simpler, more likely explanations to rule out before we get to that one. nolans platform? a few possibilities come to mind in that kind of archaeological context, but before i get to them, there is on obvious possibility that needs to be ruled out. 	Costopoulos "What do we know about the paved area in the swamp?" Feb 18, 2020
kind of archaeological context, but before i get to them, there is on obvious possibility that needs to be ruled out. according to robert john on the oak island treasure facebook group, fred nolan, one of the previous treasure seekers on oak island, created a stone platform (figure 1) in the swamp so that he could bring in a coring rig. the platform is clearly visible in the upper left corner of the accompanying unattributed photo. nolanplatform figure 1: unattributed photo of oak island showing nolans platform in the upper left corner going by the photo, nolans platform was more extensive than what is still visible today in screenshots from the show (figure 2). 	Costopoulos "What do we know about the paved area in the swamp?" Feb 18, 2020
by the photo, nolans platform was more extensive than what is still visible today in screenshots from the show (figure 2). the rest of it may have been scattered by erosion, and may be showing up as a heavy concentration of rocks of various sizes. part of it may still be submerged and recognizable as a platform when uncovered. swamp1 figure 2: screenshot from curse of oak island (s7e13: bromancing the stone), showing what is left today of nolans platform, jutting out into the swamp. the puzzling thing is that fred nolans son was interviewed on camera at the swamp, and claimed that he could not think of an explanation for the platform or the rock concentration. 	Costopoulos "What do we know about the paved area in the swamp?" Feb 18, 2020
camera at the swamp, and claimed that he could not think of an explanation for the platform or the rock concentration. he even said that his father did not have the means to create something on this scale. as the photo from the facebook group shows, someone certainly did have the means to create something on that scale in the swamp, and quite recently. rick lagina, even remarks on the colour and nature of the rock material, which is very consistent with what is visible on the photo of nolans platform. ive emailed spooner to ask him about nolans platform. ill be sure to report on any answer, if and when i get one. 	Costopoulos "What do we know about the paved area in the swamp?" Feb 18, 2020
ill be sure to report on any answer, if and when i get one. other possibilities the other two obvious possibilities from an archaeological perspective are field-clearing and fill. despite what is often claimed on the show, we know that the island was farmed and used for light industry starting in the 18th century. we know that the island, like much of that region, is rocky and covered in boulders of various sizes. the first order of business for farmer settlers in those kinds of environments is to clear the fields of rocks as much as possible. they often put the rocks to various uses, including building chimneys, field separation walls, root cellars, etc. 	Costopoulos "What do we know about the paved area in the swamp?" Feb 18, 2020
they often put the rocks to various uses, including building chimneys, field separation walls, root cellars, etc. but there are so many rocks that they often just find handy places to pile them up or simply dump them. the swamp would have been a good location for that. sometimes, they intentionally fill areas to dry them, to build stuff on them, or to facilitate travel and transport. testing the hypotheses archaeologically, there are a number of potential explanations that are simpler, and at the moment more likely, than the burying of a major treasure on oak island. the first, simplest, and likeliest explanation that has to be ruled out is that the team is finding the remains of nolans platform. 	Costopoulos "What do we know about the paved area in the swamp?" Feb 18, 2020
simplest, and likeliest explanation that has to be ruled out is that the team is finding the remains of nolans platform. this can be done mostly with historical and eye-witness data. where did nolan get his material for the platform? are the remains geologically consistent with the source? the second, for me, would be field clearing. if it turns out that this structure is separate from nolans platform, then i would do a survey of the types and sizes of rocks in the swamp structure, and compare that with what is left on the islands current surface, especially at lot boundary lines and near the shore, where field clearing would have pushed material. 	Costopoulos "What do we know about the paved area in the swamp?" Feb 18, 2020
season 11 of the curse of oak island (cooi) has featured the finds of iron objects from lot 5, both because they could be associated with a large pit structure in the same area, and because they are said to be a match, in terms of chemical composition, with iron objects found at the 17th century home of william phips, further south along the coast in new england. phips was british governor of the massachusetts bay colony in the early 1690s, and in the 1680s was involved in the salvage of what turned out to be a treasure from the wreck of the nuestra seora de la concepcin, an admiral vessel of the spanish silver train, lost in 1641. 	Costopoulos "The Phips Iron and Lot 5"  January 20, 2024
from the wreck of the nuestra seora de la concepcin, an admiral vessel of the spanish silver train, lost in 1641. portrait of william phips, from his wikipedia page apparently, actual treasure was actually recovered, although there is disagreement in the sources over how much, and whether phips and others may have embezzled some of the find. the similarity of the iron found on lot 5 with that found at the phips home in new england suggests to the cooi team that the money pit on oak island might contain part of the silver haul from the concepcin. as always with cooi, vague possibility quickly becomes probability. 	Costopoulos "The Phips Iron and Lot 5"  January 20, 2024
as always with cooi, vague possibility quickly becomes probability. what is an archaeometallurgical match? when emma from the cooi team says that the lot 5 iron is a chemical, or compositional match to the phips iron, what does that mean? the composition of archaeological metal is a result of the composition of the ore(s) from which it is extracted, and of the various steps of the extraction and manufacturing process. two pieces of iron that are from the same ore and undergo the same transformations are likely to be chemically similar, but that is only meaningful if they are compared at least to a third piece that is different in composition. 	Costopoulos "The Phips Iron and Lot 5"  January 20, 2024
similar, but that is only meaningful if they are compared at least to a third piece that is different in composition. so it seems the phips iron is similar in composition to the lot 5 iron in the context of a broader set of reference material from different times and places. because metals are worked and reworked over time, because ores can be mixed, it is always difficult to match metal samples, and it is technically not possible to match them to one particular source. the most one can say is that a particular piece is not likely to be from a particular source, and is likely to be from another. 	Costopoulos "The Phips Iron and Lot 5"  January 20, 2024
is that a particular piece is not likely to be from a particular source, and is likely to be from another. when comparing objects a, b, and c, for example, one can tell that a and c are much more similar to each other than both of them are to b. of course, there is always the possibility that there is a fourth source out there that would be very close to a and would suddenly make c look different from a. you can never rule that out. the methods used to measure the elemental composition of the samples are also important. 	Costopoulos "The Phips Iron and Lot 5"  January 20, 2024
you can never rule that out. the methods used to measure the elemental composition of the samples are also important. different methods have different detection limits for different elements, and some can see some elements much better than others. different methods also have different standard errors for different elements, which can lead to significant overlaps in measurements between samples. some of the main methods used in archaeometallurgy include instrumental neutron activation (inaa) and x-ray fluorescence (xrf). inaa has much lower detection limits and error ranges than xrf, but is useful for a narrower range of elements. xrf sees more stuff, but less well, especially for lighter elements. 	Costopoulos "The Phips Iron and Lot 5"  January 20, 2024
xrf sees more stuff, but less well, especially for lighter elements. umass lowell has a helpful write up on this. xrf has the advantage over inaa that it doesnt require a nuclear reactor, which is probably why they use it on the island. its also much quicker, requiring minutes rather than weeks. from what i can tell, the cooi team use xrf on raw samples (non-destructive analysis) rather than on polished samples or pellets made from powdered samples. that will give you a good sense of the composition, but with some limitations, although i am sure the good people of nova scotia will be happy to hear that it helps better preserves their heritage. 	Costopoulos "The Phips Iron and Lot 5"  January 20, 2024
i am sure the good people of nova scotia will be happy to hear that it helps better preserves their heritage. because xrf works by bombarding a surface with energy beams and reading the returns, rough and irregular surfaces scatter the energy and lead to higher detection limits and standard errors than measurements done on polished samples or pellets, making it more difficult to discriminate between samples and to get matches. what does an archaeometallurgical match mean in this case? assuming the match is reasonably good between the phips iron and the lot 5 iron, and i have no particular reason to doubt it, that doesnt indicate, or even strongly suggest a direct link between phips and the island. 	Costopoulos "The Phips Iron and Lot 5"  January 20, 2024
no particular reason to doubt it, that doesnt indicate, or even strongly suggest a direct link between phips and the island. based on what we see on the show, which isnt much, i wouldnt be surprised if the lot 5 pit structure is in fact a homestead or a cellar from the late 1600s, which is very cool in itself, and doesnt need to be related to treasure to be archaeologically interesting. it probably dates from around the time of phips life. it also corresponds to the period of operation of the saugus iron works in massachusetts, which produced a variety of iron implements for the atlantic seaboard from the 1640s to the 1670s. 	Costopoulos "The Phips Iron and Lot 5"  January 20, 2024
iron works in massachusetts, which produced a variety of iron implements for the atlantic seaboard from the 1640s to the 1670s. krysta ryzewski gives an excellent overview of early colonial metallurgy in new england in her 2008 phd dissertation at brown university, including the history of saugus. if the phips iron and the lot 5 iron are wholly, or even mostly from saugus, the match is not surprising at all, since they share a source, both in terms of ore and of manufacturing technique. there is also the possibility that both are the product of local household production, which used essentially similar techniques throughout early european settlements in the americas, and produced comparable outputs that would be hard to differentiate from each other with xrf on raw samples. 	Costopoulos "The Phips Iron and Lot 5"  January 20, 2024
in the americas, and produced comparable outputs that would be hard to differentiate from each other with xrf on raw samples. finished products from europe might very well show as different, though. in either case, a match between the lot 5 iron and the phips iron, even if it is a very good match chemically (under the circumstances), does not necessarily mean a direct link between phips and oak island, and certainly not between the money pit and the treasure of the concepcin. there are plenty of other good reasons for the iron used in the late 1600s on oak island and in massachusetts to be similar. 	Costopoulos "The Phips Iron and Lot 5"  January 20, 2024
significant online fan communities have developed around the most popular pseudo-archaeology television series, such as ancient aliens and curse of oak island. far from being uncritical of the claims made on those shows, these fan communities are spaces for radical speculation, but also for rapid self-correction. they are spaces in which professional archaeologists could participate more in order to foster and cultivate the critical thinking that already grows wild there. much of the archaeological discourse on pseudo-archaeology focuses on the lack of critical sophistication in the general public, but i believe there is much material there on which we can capitalize. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
lack of critical sophistication in the general public, but i believe there is much material there on which we can capitalize. here, i will examine the fan reaction to the particular claim made on episode 4 of season 6 of the curse of oak island (a legacy revealed), originally broadcast on december 4th 2018. in the episode, the team, with the help of self-described antiques expert gabriel vandervort, concludes that an iron object found in the previous episode, is in fact the point of a roman pilum, or spear. the objects discovery had already been revealed on the previous episode, broadcast on november 27th, but the team had initially speculated that it might be a medieval crossbow bolt. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
the previous episode, broadcast on november 27th, but the team had initially speculated that it might be a medieval crossbow bolt. in the debates that follow the initial broadcast of the claim, we see play out all the debates and discussions that are normal in archaeology, and we see deployed the same arguments and strategies used by professional archaeologists. notably, technological and stylistic arguments dominate, accompanied by historical and ethnographic analogy, and some degree of source criticism. some participants make taphonomic arguments. there is a concern for simplicity and economy of explanation, even among some of the true believers. rather than a rejection of expertise, i encountered a substantial debate about its nature and status. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
rather than a rejection of expertise, i encountered a substantial debate about its nature and status. i have argued before that pseudo-archaeology, far from being an existential threat to the profession, actually presents us with abundant opportunities to plant seeds of critical thinking, and theoretical and methodological rigour. after following this particular debate in some detail over a period of almost a month, i can say that the seeds are there and growing freely. the garden merely needs tending. the curse of oak island the curse of oak island follows the adventures of treasure hunters investigating the legend of a buried treasure on oak island in nova scotia. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
oak island follows the adventures of treasure hunters investigating the legend of a buried treasure on oak island in nova scotia. the main theories put forward by the searchers are that the treasure was brought there by 18th century pirates, by medieval templar knights, and now, by unspecified romans. so far, the oak island team has mostly looked for evidence of medieval templars. that is already more than a stretch for north america, so the claim of roman age activity is startling. a previous claim of a roman find on the island, this one a sword, had been debunked on the show itself by st-marys university materials experts, back in 2016. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
the island, this one a sword, had been debunked on the show itself by st-marys university materials experts, back in 2016. it is therefore interesting to look at the fan reaction to a renewed claim of a roman presence. i tracked the reaction in four main online oak island fan communities: the oak island subreddit, the oak island forum on the treasure hunting and metal detecting website treasurenet.com, a curse of oak island fan facebook page, and the official history channel curse of oak island facebook page. the claim pilum from the boston standard the claim is that this object, found on a beach on oak island, is the tip of a roman pilum. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
standard the claim is that this object, found on a beach on oak island, is the tip of a roman pilum. the reaction from treasure hunters the treasure hunting community over at treasurenet.com is arguably the closest thing to a peer group that regularly follows and comments on the curse of oak island claims. on november 28th, a day after the initial reveal, user eyemustdigtreasure created a thread about the find. posters initially critiqued the identification on technological grounds, posting evidence that medieval bolts generally had metal tips that were mounted on wooden shaft, whereas the claimed bolt was an all metal design. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
medieval bolts generally had metal tips that were mounted on wooden shaft, whereas the claimed bolt was an all metal design. user jeff of pa invoked logical economy, or an occams razor argument, complaining that apparently, nothing on this island comes from the last few treasure hunters, visitors or residents, and only knights templars left things there. user gazzahk proposed that the object could be part of a logging pole and posted comparative photo evidence and pointing out that a clarence beamish had built a saw mill on the oak island in the early 1900s. some hours before the broadcast of the episode in which the object is identified as a roman pilum, user burlbark, in the same thread, proposed that it appears to be a piece of an older style gigging spear. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
pilum, user burlbark, in the same thread, proposed that it appears to be a piece of an older style gigging spear. highlighting both the role of local knowledge in archaeological interpretation, and the importance of full transparency in scientific communication, bulbark further proposes that its very likely that someone that lives there now knows of the resident that did all the fishing. this of course will not be shared. user gazzahk, who had originally proposed the logging pole explanation, then posted a photo of a gigging spear, agreeing that it certainly does look similar to the middle spike on this one (found when google old gigging spear canada on image search.) closer match than any cross bow bolts on the internet. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
one (found when google old gigging spear canada on image search.) closer match than any cross bow bolts on the internet. from there, the gigging spear explanation rapidly gains momentum, perhaps in reaction to the roman identification. right after the broadcast, user darefulosit posts so this young expert says the crossbow bolt is a roman pilum. i do not believe so. 2000 years old. do not think so. more likely along the line of a 1/4 hotwire post fashioned into a gigging spear by some handy fellow within the last century. a minute later, user caryl adds absolutely! just went down and looked at my 9 foot antique frog gigger. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
a minute later, user caryl adds absolutely! just went down and looked at my 9 foot antique frog gigger. my points are still sharp, but the center spike is the same  inch with a barb on it. keep in mind mine hasnt been rolling in stone surf for a couple of decades. a third proposal, by user stonebottles identifies the object as jesuit harpoon pointsgiven to the indians by the jesuit priests here in ontario. user gazzahk acknowledges this as more plausible than the romans and citing j.steeles theory (from her book the oak island mystery, solved)that there was a naval store operation on oi run and controlled by the jesuits. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
her book the oak island mystery, solved)that there was a naval store operation on oi run and controlled by the jesuits. this particular group, which is part peer group and part fan community, but which is obviously made up of regular watchers, reacted to the claim by comparing it to known examples of cross bow bolts and pila, and by suggesting alternatives that are simpler explanations, given what we know of the local historical context. they quickly converged on the gigging spear hypothesis. the reaction from redditors over on the curse of oak island subreddit, which is made up of equal parts true believers, tongue in cheek fans, and harsh critics, user olddriller created a thread about the find right after the first broadcast on which it was tentatively identified as a crossbow bolt. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
created a thread about the find right after the first broadcast on which it was tentatively identified as a crossbow bolt. the user notes, however, that in the teaser for the following episode, the object is claimed to be roman, and on that basis, the user speculates that it is a pilum head. olddriller reviews other possibilies, such as marlinspike and wood awl, but concludes that a mass spectrometer laser test should be done on the metal to get a finer metal technology dating, since obviously you cant do a carbon dating on it. the discussion in this thread tends to the technological. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
the discussion in this thread tends to the technological. user mindless_rutabaga notes that a crossbow bolt would have had a bigger head to stabilize in flight. user neugo worries that the image appears to show the edge of the blade being about 1 cm thick! its not sharp at all. that means it cant possibly be a crossbow bolt of the end of a spear. it cant be a weapon at all. after a user suggests a masons tool, user macoisdealbh responds definitely not a masons tool, would not last a day dressing stone with that item modern restoration tools are similar, but high tungsten steel and industrial diamond heads on those!! user redux2redux makes another technological argument: my first thought was that it looked machined or stamped in the transition from the tip down to the round part of the shaft. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
was that it looked machined or stamped in the transition from the tip down to the round part of the shaft. not hand made or hammered out. few users in that thread are convinced of either the crossbow bolt or the pilum identification. several are working hard at it though. user williamjamesmyers: this item is unidentified as of yet, no direct match, put about 8 hours into it so far. still looking its the tip that i cant match to anything else. the gigging spear or fishing harpoon possibility is raised at various points in this thread, but doesnt take off as it did on the treasurenet board. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
harpoon possibility is raised at various points in this thread, but doesnt take off as it did on the treasurenet board. however, upon reflection and after the broadcast of the pilum episode, the reddit community does eventually converge on the gigging spear explanation. or as user the skepticalsensei suggests in the true spirit of reddit, its a lure. not a fishing lure. its a watch next tuesday lure. the reaction on facebook posting on the curse of oak island (new no drama  official) facebook group on december 5th, user josh russel, who apparently is just down the road from me in ponoka, alberta, asks whether the bros [lagina brothers, protagonists of the show] know about the attempts to discredit the romans being there by that certain group of historians? 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
brothers, protagonists of the show] know about the attempts to discredit the romans being there by that certain group of historians? in that thread, user jarrod morgan proposes the logging pin explanation and a few posts down, user chris wilson proposes the gigging spear, with a picture in support. user joshua robert betts on the same day reports that my very first through last week when they found the crossbow bolt was thats a pilum. user winthrop w. hamilton, for his part, thinks that the producers damage credibility when they make outrageous claims about roman artifacts when it is obviously a fishing tool. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
thinks that the producers damage credibility when they make outrageous claims about roman artifacts when it is obviously a fishing tool. we had one similar on the farm. user david tulo is in a minority in that thread in his support of the pilum explanation: the british museum has samples of roman pilums that look precisely like what the (sic) found on the show. the post has two likes. user bob prokop, while not completely dismissing the possibility of a pilum, makes an ethno-historical argument. the so-called roman pilum seems very small in scale. it also appears a bit blunt  although this could be due to age id lean toward thinking perhaps it was a tine off a fishing spear of some kind used by the native mikmaq. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
id lean toward thinking perhaps it was a tine off a fishing spear of some kind used by the native mikmaq. he brings the rumoured nearby u-shaped structure into the argument: and the u-shaped structure at the same location just remnants of an old fishing weir? pretty sure both [fishing spear and weir] were commonly used by mikmaq for eel spearing. he provides a historical photo and a link from the nova scotia museum in support of his argument. over on what seems to be the curated history channel curse of oak island facebook page, the host account asked last nights episode was explosive! 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
to be the curated history channel curse of oak island facebook page, the host account asked last nights episode was explosive! what could this roman artifact mean for the hunt? immediately below, user joe keaton responds: tell your weapons expert it [is] a prong broken off an old fishing spear, with a photo in support. there follows a long discussion with arguments both for and against the fishing spear and the pilum explanations. user dareick kernz agrees that it is not roman, but worries that if it was a fishing spear/prong i would expect more of a barb(s) on the ends. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
not roman, but worries that if it was a fishing spear/prong i would expect more of a barb(s) on the ends. however, dareick kernz remains confused because the more i look around the more roman pilum spear keeps popping up. the thread shows a highly variable degree of respect for the expertise presented on the show. user joshua carr, pushing back against the critiques of the pilum interpretation asks what good is it to be an expert at anything anymore? i found this photo on the internet and to me it looks more like a this object, not the object your expert says it is. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
on the internet and to me it looks more like a this object, not the object your expert says it is. in a more sarcastic vein, user jared wolney tells a doubter, you proved an accredited, professional, respected, experienced, specialized, antiquities expert wrong with a one- minute google search. you might be the smartest man alive. on the other hand, user andrew nyberg claims that the weapons expert doesnt even know what a roman pilum was used for. and user maureen ahearn complains that their experts dont seem very expert to me, just the same people history channel uses in their other theoretical shows. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
that their experts dont seem very expert to me, just the same people history channel uses in their other theoretical shows. what i have learned this exploration, in real time, of a particular unfolding debate in pseudo-archaeological fan communities has taught me a few important lessons. pseudo-archaeology communities deploy the same tools and strategies to evaluate claims as professional archaeological communities. they do so with less background and training, but those can be developed. expertise, rather than being summarily rejected or even being highly suspect, is debated and is used both in support of and in opposition to pseudo-archaeological claims. while professional archaeologists often complain about the lack of respect for expertise among the public, and see it as one of the contributing factors to the success of pseudo-archaeology, respect for expertise can actually be harnessed by pseudo-archaeologists. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
it as one of the contributing factors to the success of pseudo-archaeology, respect for expertise can actually be harnessed by pseudo-archaeologists. perhaps the most valuable lesson of the project for me is that the popularity and television ratings of shows such as curse of oak island cannot be taken at face value as a reflection of uncritical acceptance of pseudo-archaeological claims and models of the past by the public. far from it. in the fan communities which i followed, even on the curated history channel oak island page, there is at least as much critique as there is support for the claims, and in most cases much more. 	Costopoulos "Pseudo-archaeology and self-correction in Curse of Oak Island fan communities" December 18, 2018
the two hour opener of season 11 heavily features the discovery of coins, both roman and medieval, on lot 5, near and around the circular depression. as always, we can ask ourselves how surprising and how significant these finds are, and what they might mean. do the coins indicate treasure? the coins found on lot 5 are essentially coppers. the hoxne hoard, found in england in the 90s, is the largest roman treasure known to date. it contains hundreds of gold solidii, thousands of silver coins, and just a few bronze ones. thats a treasure. the coins from lot 5 are closer to daily pocket change than to treasure. 	Costopoulos "Roman coins on Lot 5"  November 15, 2023
thats a treasure. the coins from lot 5 are closer to daily pocket change than to treasure. one of the roman coins from lot 5 how did the coins get to oak island? despite this treasure downer, its still very interesting to think about how a bunch of roman coins made it to oak island and were discovered in an ostensibly 17th-19th century context. archaeologists, historians, and treasure hunters have long wondered whether stray finds of ancient european coins in north america could support the idea of pre-colombian transatlantic voyages. in 1980, jeremiah epstein of the university of texas at austin published in the journal current anthropology a fairly comprehensive (at the time) survey of ancient coin finds in the us. 	Costopoulos "Roman coins on Lot 5"  November 15, 2023
austin published in the journal current anthropology a fairly comprehensive (at the time) survey of ancient coin finds in the us. as is the practice in current anthropology, his article is accompanied by commentary from a wide range of scholars, and a reply by the author. the article and the discussion show that there was a lively debate at that time between a diffusionist school of archaeology that favoured early and frequent transatlantic contact, and a majority of scholars less receptive to the idea. epsteins survey evaluates the context of various coin finds and the reliability of information available about them. 	Costopoulos "Roman coins on Lot 5"  November 15, 2023
epsteins survey evaluates the context of various coin finds and the reliability of information available about them. the conclusion is that in most cases, the coins are likely to be recent (post-wwii) imports lost by their owners in the us. there are a small number of coins that dont fit that description. was there a coin collector on oak island? apart from being lost as strays by people who brought them back from europe, the middle east, or north africa, roman coins can appear as part of collections in archaeological context. the fact that three roman and at least one medieval coin were found on lot 5, in close proximity to each other, argues against random loss. 	Costopoulos "Roman coins on Lot 5"  November 15, 2023
and at least one medieval coin were found on lot 5, in close proximity to each other, argues against random loss. the finds are clustered in a way that stray finds usually arent. randomly lost coins, as we see from epsteins 1980 survey, are usually found alone. european coin collecting as a hobby goes back at least to the middle ages, and probably earlier. its entirely possible that one of the early european settlers of oak island kept a coin collection, or perhaps just had a particular interest in roman coins. this possibility is difficult to evaluate. perhaps some information can be found in family histories. 	Costopoulos "Roman coins on Lot 5"  November 15, 2023
this possibility is difficult to evaluate. perhaps some information can be found in family histories. maybe someone has an ancestor who lived on oak island and has a box of old coins in their basement, handed down in the family over the generations. who knows. ballast there is another mechanism for bringing ancient european coins to north america that i think fits the context and chronology of oak island much better. from the sixteenth century to the early 1900s, sailing ships often arrived in the americas in ballast. the goods they were carrying to colonial markets were less bulky and heavy than the products they would bring back to europe. 	Costopoulos "Roman coins on Lot 5"  November 15, 2023
goods they were carrying to colonial markets were less bulky and heavy than the products they would bring back to europe. in order to improve the sailing characteristics of their ships, sailors often loaded them with ballast taken from european harbours. this could include rocks, sandbags filled locally, or any other junk found on the shore that was the right size and heavy enough for the purpose. on arrival in an american harbour, sailors would bring their cargo ashore and also dump their ballast before reloading with colonial products. as early as 1968, emery et al published in the journal science a survey of european flint nodules, including sometimes paleolithic stone tools, found on american shores as a result of ballast dumping. 	Costopoulos "Roman coins on Lot 5"  November 15, 2023
a survey of european flint nodules, including sometimes paleolithic stone tools, found on american shores as a result of ballast dumping. when the ballast consisted of sand or smaller gravel taken from a european shore, smaller archaeological objects were sometimes carried to the americas and redeposited as ballast dumps. in a recent article, wilksinson discusses ballast coins from europe found in the americas. weve learned over time that ballast finds are not restricted to ballast dump sites. ballast was often reused locally for landscaping, fill, roadwork, etc, both by governments and by individual landowners. and ballast was not found uniquely to be found on the shore next to piers and wharves, as might be expected. 	Costopoulos "Roman coins on Lot 5"  November 15, 2023
and ballast was not found uniquely to be found on the shore next to piers and wharves, as might be expected. over the course of the seventeenth century, ballast dumping rapidly became a problem for local authorities for harbour maintenance and access. a number of jurisdictions passed laws and ordinances that ballast had to be dumped above the high tide line, for example. ballast archaeology is a thing in nova scotia, by the way. this report from 1996, for example, mentions ballast no fewer than 5 times. one of the most fascinating aspects of ballast archaeology is that objects were often moved around the mediterranean and european atlantic coast through ballast loading and dumping before they even got to the americas. 	Costopoulos "Roman coins on Lot 5"  November 15, 2023
often moved around the mediterranean and european atlantic coast through ballast loading and dumping before they even got to the americas. a coin taken on as part of ballast in rhodes could be dumped in marseilles, taken up again from a ballast dump, carried to la rochelle, dumped again, taken on with a paleolithic flint artifact, and carried to massachusetts, or maybe mahone bay, and dumped there to be found in 2023. ballast can really mix things up and create some hellacious puzzles for archaeologists and historians. we ignore it at our interpretive peril. we know from the archaeology done on oak island so far that a lot of farming happened there starting at least in the mid-1700s, and some light industry as well. 	Costopoulos "Roman coins on Lot 5"  November 15, 2023
so far that a lot of farming happened there starting at least in the mid-1700s, and some light industry as well. it wouldnt be surprising at all if ships regularly dumped some ballast at the island, and if some of its landowners reused the ballast for their own purposes (in building for example). it wouldnt even be surprising if ballast dumps from the mainland were transported and reused on oak island. some of that ballast may have contained roman coins. conclusion in other words, there are a number of possibilities for how those roman coins made their way to lot 5, and the least likely of them is that they were part of a medieval templar treasure. 	Costopoulos "Roman coins on Lot 5"  November 15, 2023
their way to lot 5, and the least likely of them is that they were part of a medieval templar treasure. could the coins have been planted? sure. oak island has a long history of hyping and searching for investors. but then why plant them, away from the money pit, and not use them? they are not likely to be individual losses. they could be part of a collection made by a former resident, but they are most likely to have been brought over and dumped as ballast. references emery et al. 1968. european cretaceous flints on the coast of north america, science 160:1225-1228. 	Costopoulos "Roman coins on Lot 5"  November 15, 2023
on s07e22 (marks x the spot), following a tip from the ground penetrating radar survey of samuel balls property, the team uncover what they describe as a tunnel, which they speculate may have been related to the hiding of treasure near balls house, or perhaps even to the money pit itself. samuelballdrain jack begley of the oak island team puzzling over samuel balls secret tunnel the first thing to note about the tunnel, is that it is actually quite small. judging from the television images, it seems to be about 40 cm wide, by perhaps 20 cm deep. so it clearly isnt any sort of passage way for humans. 	Costopoulos "Samuel Balls secret tunnel" April 28, 2020
so it clearly isnt any sort of passage way for humans. as shown by an exploration using a snake camera, it is a long, low cavity, covered with flat stones. it is clear from the images that samuel ball didnt carry gold to and from the money pit using this secret tunnel, and neither did anyone else. i believe reddit user cancantcat identifies the feature correctly, albeit in terms not quite elegant enough to appear on this high-minded blog, as a sewer line, or more accurately, a covered drain. archaeologist jennifer bracewell and her team found a slightly larger but very similar structure at the 18th century maison nivard site on the island of montreal in 2016. 	Costopoulos "Samuel Balls secret tunnel" April 28, 2020
a slightly larger but very similar structure at the 18th century maison nivard site on the island of montreal in 2016. if i remember correctly, the main question at maison nivard was whether this drain was intended mainly for domestic sewage, or simply for agricultural runoff. personally, i tend to the run-off explanation for both the maison nivard and the samuel ball sites, as the slope and size of both drains seem to me insufficient to efficiently deal with household sewage. but that is pure speculation. chemical analysis of the soil inside the drains might help answer the question. sherene baugher, in a 2001 article in northeast historical archaeology, provides an interesting overview of such drainage features on archaeological sites in the broader region. 	Costopoulos "Samuel Balls secret tunnel" April 28, 2020
the later part of season 8 of curse of oak island (cooi) focuses largely on the possibility that a stone road connects a wharf-like structure at the edge of the swamp area and the money pit area. the cooi team, this time supported by archaeologists aaron taylor and environmental scientist ian spooner, are putting forward the idea that it is possible that the road was used to carry heavy material to the money pit area, perhaps by the depositors of the treasure. frequent ox shoe finds and a ring bolts are further interpreted as being part of this transport system. it is always difficult to tell from television pictures, but as an archaeologist, there are a few fundamental questions i would like answered before i conclude that there is indeed a stone road that connects the wharf with the upper part of the island. 	Costopoulos "Is there a stone road?"  March 23, 202
before i conclude that there is indeed a stone road that connects the wharf with the upper part of the island. the first thing i notice is that the stone wharf at the edge of the swamp is very well defined, while the stone road seems much less obvious. second, in the episode broadcast so far at least, the stone road seems to follow the edge of the swamp, which would be the old shoreline of one of the rocky hills that form oak island. boulder or cobble beaches are not exactly uncommon in the area of oak island. here is a nice example from nearby lunenburg, nova scotia (figure 1). 	Costopoulos "Is there a stone road?"  March 23, 202
here is a nice example from nearby lunenburg, nova scotia (figure 1). if this were covered with dirt over a few centuries, and if one were to come along and excavate a straight trench through it, one could very well conclude that there was a stone road there at some point. restaurants, hotels, festivals, events, activities, things to do | lunenburg region figure 1: a nova scotia cobble beach from https://www.lunenburgregion.ca/themes/user/site/default/asset/img/rotator/_small/img_0069.jpg another issue is that on the opposite shore of the swamp, to the left of figure 2 shows a clearly visible scattering of small boulders or large cobbles, and may look very much like the shore on which the road is located. 	Costopoulos "Is there a stone road?"  March 23, 202
scattering of small boulders or large cobbles, and may look very much like the shore on which the road is located. again as an archaeologist, i would want to dig a test trench on that other shore, to see if i find something similar to the road, or whether the stone road really is different. figure 2: context of the stone road. stone road goes up the right side of the swamp. would the findings be similar on the left side? thinking back to the picture of the lunenburg beach above, i would also want to widen the original trench to see if i am dealing with a straight line or with a broader scatter. 	Costopoulos "Is there a stone road?"  March 23, 202
want to widen the original trench to see if i am dealing with a straight line or with a broader scatter. perhaps the cooi team are doing this already, but if so, we havent heard, and that makes it difficult for the viewer to evaluate the claim that there is indeed a road there. as for the ox shoes, they are consistent with a stone road, but they are not evidence of it. there is a difference. if there is a road, it is not surprising to find ox shoes. finding ox shoes, however, doesnt suggest a road. it suggests that there were oxen, which is not surprising on an island used for farming for a few centuries. 	Costopoulos "Is there a stone road?"  March 23, 202
it suggests that there were oxen, which is not surprising on an island used for farming for a few centuries. and then theres the searcher activity, of course. as commenter marty writes below before, and during the construction of the causeway, all equipment, boilers, machinery etc. arrived by boat on the south shore. it would be no surprise that a road to the money pit exists to transport all this stuff. at the end of the last episode (s08e16), there is the revelation that the road may branch toward money pit area and away from the swamp shore. if it does, i hope the team does more than dig a linear trench to the money pit before they conclude that there is a road. 	Costopoulos "Is there a stone road?"  March 23, 202
season 11 opens with rick marty craig jack and alex arriving at the war room where the rest of the team awaits them !! some of the team are present via video along with some new members who are introduced!! rick says lets get - r -done . they discuss the areas they will focus on this season which are the garden shaft where gary detected non-ferrous metals at the end of s- 10 on the bottom of the shaft!! dumas will drill 20 more feet down this year!! the baby blob where a tunnel was found 80 - 120 ft down last year!! 	Forsyth S11E1: ON THE MONEY!! 2 Hours of show November 8, 2023
the baby blob where a tunnel was found 80 - 120 ft down last year!! ian has narrowed down the important area to a 20 ft radius. laird and his team will focus on lot 5 where they will expand the search of the 13 ft circular structure!! laird is now convinced that robert young, who owned lot 5, placed the stones around the top!! why did he do that?? finally, they will dig into 4 areas of interest in the swamp!! tony sampson will dive off of the north end of the swamp to see if there are any artifacts there that relate to the dam fred nolan believed to be at the top of the swamp!! 	Forsyth S11E1: ON THE MONEY!! 2 Hours of show November 8, 2023
there are any artifacts there that relate to the dam fred nolan believed to be at the top of the swamp!! with this all in mind the team departs to get after it. - while the team in the money pit area begins drilling a 6 borehole   b5n-13 to search for a tunnel on lot 5 laird and his team begin digging on the circular structure!! right away, from the top edge, they find a piece of redware pottery laird dates from the 17th to 18th centuries!! laird says they must go deeper!! marty rick and gary arrive at to metal detect and after the detector beeps from inside the structure laird digs up a metal piece!! 	Forsyth S11E1: ON THE MONEY!! 2 Hours of show November 8, 2023
gary arrive at to metal detect and after the detector beeps from inside the structure laird digs up a metal piece!! marty believes it to be a latch off of a cellar door!! it goes to the lab for testing!! - back at the money pit area they are down 109ft where they find only a soft soil zone !! steve points out they are just 2 1/2 ft from the baby blob where high amounts of metal have been detected so they drill to 114ft where the soil is firmer but no artifacts!! craig says they need to decide where to drill next !! 	Forsyth S11E1: ON THE MONEY!! 2 Hours of show November 8, 2023
craig says they need to decide where to drill next !! - its a new morning and in the lab laird and emma are testing the metal latch found on lot 5 yesterday!! the test results show iron with no manganese so it is pre - 1840!! laird says they have nothing like this metal but believes it does match artifacts found at the birthplace of william phips in maine !! more research is needed!! - later that morning back on lot 5 rick and gary are metal detecting and rick digs up another coin just 30 yards from where the half roman coin was found last year!! 	Forsyth S11E1: ON THE MONEY!! 2 Hours of show November 8, 2023
metal detecting and rick digs up another coin just 30 yards from where the half roman coin was found last year!! next, rick digs up a second coin that looks like the first!! they call craig and marty who arrive a few minutes later and upon seeing the first coin marty believes it to be similar to the roman coin!! rick digs up a 3rd coin that resembles the others!! they are bagged and taken right to the lab!! - as we enter hour 2 we find the team in the lab where they are testing the 3 coins found the day before!! 	Forsyth S11E1: ON THE MONEY!! 2 Hours of show November 8, 2023
enter hour 2 we find the team in the lab where they are testing the 3 coins found the day before!! the xrf machine shows the 1st coin to be made of copper and silver so not roman but old!! the 2nd coin on which laird can see the outline of a face proves to be copper lead and tin so could be roman!! the 3rd coin is engraved with a woven pattern and is made of brass iron and heavy amounts of manganese!! emma believes it to be french from the 13th century and matches the barter token and the lead cross!! 	Forsyth S11E1: ON THE MONEY!! 2 Hours of show November 8, 2023
emma believes it to be french from the 13th century and matches the barter token and the lead cross!! they will call in sandy campbell, coin expert, to take a look at these 3 odd balls!! - over at the money pit in the middle of the baby blob the team is drilling borehole  e5n-9.5 and at 99ft down and has found nothing . steve points out that this is near hole dn-11.5 where a void and gold in the wood were found last year!! - the following morning back at the money pit again they are drilling hole dn-12 in the baby blob 3ft east of hole dn-11.5 in hopes of finding a tunnel or chamber !! 	Forsyth S11E1: ON THE MONEY!! 2 Hours of show November 8, 2023
drilling hole dn-12 in the baby blob 3ft east of hole dn-11.5 in hopes of finding a tunnel or chamber !! - over at the research center the team is discussing having tony sampson dive off the coast of the north end of the swamp where they think there could be a man-made dam!! - later that afternoon gary rick craig and marty are metal detecting!! unfortunately, craig digs up a piece of modern-day metal while marty digs up a 4th coin !! - meanwhile tony begins his dive off the north shore of the swamp!! they also put down an rov sub so the rest of the team could see the bottom!! 	Forsyth S11E1: ON THE MONEY!! 2 Hours of show November 8, 2023
they also put down an rov sub so the rest of the team could see the bottom!! tony sees what looks like several pieces of handmade planks along with pottery and sailor pipe stem!! tonys detector goes off and he finds what looks like a coin with a hole in the middle like the chinese coin found a year ago!! sadly tony cannot dig or remove any artifacts until they receive a permit!! they will be back!! - at the money pit a core comes up from 101 ft down and at 971/2 ft they find wooden beams!! marty believes this could be a collapsed chamber!! 	Forsyth S11E1: ON THE MONEY!! 2 Hours of show November 8, 2023
marty believes this could be a collapsed chamber!! the wood will be tested!! - the episode ends in the interpretive center with sandy campbell examining the 4 coins!! the 1st coin is british from the 1500s and has a gate design on it common at that time!! could it be related to the william phips story?? more research is needed!! to sandy, the 2nd coin is obviously roman from 100-300 ad!! the 3rd he thinks is from india from the 5th century!! the 4th has a male portrait on one side and 2 people on the other side!! sandy says it is roman over 2000 years old from the bc era!! 	Forsyth S11E1: ON THE MONEY!! 2 Hours of show November 8, 2023
a new morning on oak island finds the team in the war room meeting with the dumas team in their headquarters via video!! dumas too is disappointed with the progress so far this year!! they have come up with a new plan to stop the flow of water into the garden shaft!! in a weeks time new equipment for putting in the geofoam will arrive!! the geofoam will be 40% stronger than what they are now using!! rick points out they need to get the shaft down to 95 feet in order to hit the tunnel they believe to be there!! 	Forsyth S11E10: CHAIN REACTION January 17, 2024
they need to get the shaft down to 95 feet in order to hit the tunnel they believe to be there!! its everyones hope this new equipment will do the trick!! they say goodbye to dumas and then proceed to discuss aladdins cave!! they are considering putting a caisson down into the cave but will first drill a new borehole and take a look down!! - later that afternoon in the southeast corner of the swamp billy is back digging and gary is detecting as they continue looking for more of the stone road!! gary finds another piece of a large crudely made chain with a hook!! 	Forsyth S11E10: CHAIN REACTION January 17, 2024
gary finds another piece of a large crudely made chain with a hook!! rick sees that there is a 3-point hitch attached to the chain and says this could pull heavy items across a beach!! it will go to the lab and carmen!! next gary pulls up a piece of wood with iron embedded inside it and not far away he pulls up a second piece of wood with what looks like a roseheaded spike inside it!! the spike looks to be from the 1700s!! both items will go to the lab!! meanwhile while in the interpretive center, the team is examining artifacts found on lot 5 last week!! 	Forsyth S11E10: CHAIN REACTION January 17, 2024
meanwhile while in the interpretive center, the team is examining artifacts found on lot 5 last week!! laird says the small piece of decorative stone is definitely a whetstone used to sharpen tools!! emma points out that the x-ray shows iron on the stone where the tool would have been sharpened!! the 2nd artifact is a small piece of iron shaped like a nail but they are not sure what it is!! emma says the metal in it matches to the same period as the phips artifacts!! that brings up the question, did phips build the circular structure on lot 5?? 	Forsyth S11E10: CHAIN REACTION January 17, 2024
that brings up the question, did phips build the circular structure on lot 5?? laird believes the answer is at the bottom of the structure so they will continue to dig!! - the following morning in the money pit area the team began to drill a new borehole kl-15 hoping to reach into aladdins cave!! a core from 140 feet down hits the table and terry cuts it open to find solid soil at the top and slush at the bottom!! one of the men from the drill team arrives to tell them he believes they have hit a cavity at 147 feet but it is full of slush so he believes there has been a collapse in the cave!! 	Forsyth S11E10: CHAIN REACTION January 17, 2024
cavity at 147 feet but it is full of slush so he believes there has been a collapse in the cave!! - moving to the war room the team meets with marty and craig via video to inform them of a collapse in the cave!! marty is very disappointed!! alex says there is a chance it is only a partial collapse!! the team decided to have steve and paul put together all the data from the camera and sonar tests on the cave and report back to them!! - over on lot 5 the archaeologists continue to dig in the circular structure while helen and jamie sift the spoils!! 	Forsyth S11E10: CHAIN REACTION January 17, 2024
- over on lot 5 the archaeologists continue to dig in the circular structure while helen and jamie sift the spoils!! helen finds a piece of stoneware from the 1700s and bags it!! fiona then discovers what could be the entrance to a cellar or the top of a staircase in the side of the structure!! jamie says there looks to be more below ground!! fiona keeps digging!! while sifting jamie then finds a decorative bead that looks to be venetian glass from the 14th century used for decoration and also for currency!! laird emphasizes this is a very important artifact!! 	Forsyth S11E10: CHAIN REACTION January 17, 2024
laird emphasizes this is a very important artifact!! - later that day in the southeast corner of the swamp jack digs up a large rod iron fastener that looks to be from the 1700s or older!! it goes to the lab!! - as morning arrives in the interpretive center carmen is examining the artifacts found in the southeast corner of the swamp!! the first item is the wood with metal inside and carmen says there are 2 handmade nails alongside of a bigger item and believes this piece could have held a lamp in a structure!! could there be a structure in the southeast corner of the swamp?? 	Forsyth S11E10: CHAIN REACTION January 17, 2024
could there be a structure in the southeast corner of the swamp?? what could it be?? the second artifact, carmen says, is a tool that would have been used to drive pins into timber from the 1600s to late 1700s!! the third item is the chain and hook which according to carmen is from the 1500s to 1650s!! emmas testing shows this piece could be from the same time period as the phips artifacts!! carmen then realizes that there is a newer chain connected to the old part but a 3-point hitch!! who added the newer chain?? this piece was probably used to move cargo by a boom from a ship to shore!! 	Forsyth S11E10: CHAIN REACTION January 17, 2024
this piece was probably used to move cargo by a boom from a ship to shore!! more research is needed!! - as another week ends on oak island the team meets in the war room to examine the data steve and paul have put together on aladdins cave!! steve shows a video taken but the team on one side and by the pro hawk company on the other!! they see the bolt sitting on a flat area and wonder why that is there?? the main feature shows a very clear right angle that could not be natural to the cave!! steve believes it to be the entrance they are looking for and craig adds it could potentially be man-made!! 	Forsyth S11E10: CHAIN REACTION January 17, 2024
steve believes it to be the entrance they are looking for and craig adds it could potentially be man-made!! steve sees a second opening going both east and west!! ian wonders where the metals are coming from that have shown up in the water tests!! steve declares that the southern edge seems to have collapsed over time!! the team needs to see whats down there so they make the decision to put down a caisson as marty believes the collapse could be hiding whats on the cave floor!! will they find treasure on aladdins cave floor?? stay with us to get the answer fellow questers!! 	Forsyth S11E10: CHAIN REACTION January 17, 2024
as a new day begins on oak island we find billy digging in the southeast corner of the swamp and gary is busy metal detecting!! they are hoping to find more of the stone road and hope it continues on to the beach!! rick picks up a rounded 6 piece of wood that is pointed and definitely axe cut!! they bag it for testing!! next, they discover an area of layered sand then peat and knowing it should be, if natural, peat then sand they call ian to come take a look at it!! ian seeing this believes the stone road extends to the beach and suggests they dig 3-4 ft deeper!! 	Forsyth S11E11: PLUGGED UP!! January 24, 2024
ian seeing this believes the stone road extends to the beach and suggests they dig 3-4 ft deeper!! - over at the money pit marty and craig are meeting with roger from dumas at the garden shaft!! with roger are 2 men from a company called minova global that specializes in the placement of the geofoam they are about to put into the holes and cracks in the garden shaft where the water is pouring in!! marty and craig tell them good luck as they start up their pump!! - 60 ft southwest the team is finally looking for an anomaly found by muon at 170 ft down!! 	Forsyth S11E11: PLUGGED UP!! January 24, 2024
- 60 ft southwest the team is finally looking for an anomaly found by muon at 170 ft down!! they are drilling a new borehole k-6 and a core that comes up from 118 ft down!! in it they find a rock  the size of which would be put into a flood tunnel!! have they hit a flood tunnel and if so will it lead them to what it is protecting like, hopefully, the chappell vault?? time will tell!! - over on lot 5 marty is being updated by laird and his team!! helen informs him that the circular structure is proving to be a rectangular structure that could date to the same time as the garden shaft!! 	Forsyth S11E11: PLUGGED UP!! January 24, 2024
the circular structure is proving to be a rectangular structure that could date to the same time as the garden shaft!! they want to extend the structure and ask marty, using the backhoe, to remove the large rocks!! the work begins!! - back on the southern edge of the swamp billy is digging and finds what he believes to be the end of the stone road!! garys beeper goes off and rick digs up a small tack or small fastener and they bag it for the xrf machine!! as billy digs deeper they come across pieces of white pottery along with a handle that seems to be from one pottery item!! 	Forsyth S11E11: PLUGGED UP!! January 24, 2024
digs deeper they come across pieces of white pottery along with a handle that seems to be from one pottery item!! the team hopes that the archaeologists can put this item back together!! a 2nd piece of dark pottery surface seems to have a leaf design on it and a 3rd piece of the same color looks to be glazed on one side!! hopefully, they will find a maker\'s mark on a piece of this pottery in order to date it!! - the following morning the team is back in the money pit area continuing the drilling of borehole k-6 and mike from the drill team informs them they have hit a void at 183 ft down!! 	Forsyth S11E11: PLUGGED UP!! January 24, 2024
drilling of borehole k-6 and mike from the drill team informs them they have hit a void at 183 ft down!! a core hits the table and they find 10 ft of normal material but the bottom, under the bedrock, looks to be disturbed!! as they are close to hole h- 8 could they be in the chappell vault?? terry says hole k-6 may answer some questions for us!! - later that afternoon we find the team in the war room discussing the findings in borehole k-6!! they decide that since k-6 is close to hole h-8 where they believe they hit the chappell vault and pushed it down and sideways they will drill another borehole in order to try to hit the muon low-density anomaly and void!! 	Forsyth S11E11: PLUGGED UP!! January 24, 2024
it down and sideways they will drill another borehole in order to try to hit the muon low-density anomaly and void!! steve says that will be done in the next few days!! - mean while on lot 5 alex arrives and helen shows him a piece of european flint found earlier!! helen says she can tell its european by the color and it would be used to start a fire!! the piece was found in the foundation of the structure and will go to the lab!! alex begins sifting the spoils and finds several small pieces of green copper!! helen declares that because they are so delicate the pieces are probably decorative!! 	Forsyth S11E11: PLUGGED UP!! January 24, 2024
helen declares that because they are so delicate the pieces are probably decorative!! these pieces are lab bound!! - the episode ends in the southeast corner of the swamp where jack has just pulled up a 3 ft long piece of log and they wonder if it was used as a roller on which to move heavy cargo on the stone road!! gary then picks up a 4 ft long piece of wood he believes could be a plank or decking from a ship!! these pieces will be c-14 tested!! as billy digs closer to the beach they see a difference between the swamp muck and the gravel close to the beach!! 	Forsyth S11E11: PLUGGED UP!! January 24, 2024
billy digs closer to the beach they see a difference between the swamp muck and the gravel close to the beach!! to their surprise, they then see what looks like a piece of a log wall!! right away they wonder if this is part of the wall fred nolan found here and on the north shore in 1969?. these walls led fred to believe the swamp was man-made many years ago in order to hide something very important!! they call rick and when he arrives he finds the wall-like structure very exciting and hopes it is freds wall as it could be original work!! 	Forsyth S11E11: PLUGGED UP!! January 24, 2024
as a new day begins on oak island alex arrives at the garden shaft to talk to roger from dumas who informs him that the geofoam has been put into the shaft and it is finally secure. roger is relieved that dumas can now finish their dig going down from 89 ft to 95 ft!! at this point, they hope to find a tunnel by drilling through the side walls of the shaft!! alex leaves so the dig can begin!! - later that afternoon 73 ft to the southwest marty joins the team in the money pit area where they have begun to drill borehole 2.25-6.25 near hole h- 8 where they believe the chappell vault is!! 	Forsyth S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN January 31
pit area where they have begun to drill borehole 2.25-6.25 near hole h- 8 where they believe the chappell vault is!! a core hits the table from 78 ft down and they find wood in the top which, charles points out, could be wood from the chappell shaft and terry agrees saying they could be skimming along the outer edge!! mike from the drill team then walks over holding what looks like an old piece of drill pipe that came out of the new core!! marty says this could be the pipe that found the vault so keep digging and follow that pipe on down!! 	Forsyth S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN January 31
marty says this could be the pipe that found the vault so keep digging and follow that pipe on down!! - over in the southeast corner of the swamp billy continues to dig as gary detects!! jack picks up a squared piece of timber that has a notch in it!! they call rick and upon his arrival show him this artifact and he sees a spot where a dowel once went through!! this reminds him of the dowels found in the u-shaped structure in smiths cove so they keep digging!! meanwhile while on lot 5 alex arrives at the circular structure and jamie informs him that the structure looks to be much larger than they originally thought meaning it was probably built by a larger group than just a family!! 	Forsyth S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN January 31
to be much larger than they originally thought meaning it was probably built by a larger group than just a family!! as the archaeologists dig in the bottom of the structure fiona digs up a small piece of metal that looks to be decorative and of course could be off of a chest!! it goes to the lab!! - back in the swamp they find a wall-like structure with metal fasteners visible in it!! could this be the edge of the stone road?? as billy digs deeper they find more wood and rick decides he wants marty and craig to see this before they dig deeper!! 	Forsyth S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN January 31
digs deeper they find more wood and rick decides he wants marty and craig to see this before they dig deeper!! upon their arrival, rick shows them the timbers below what they think is the edge of the stone road!! they all agree that because of the way the road was covered up the builders didnt want it to be found!! billy continues to dig deeper under the stone road!! - over in the new lab that is finally finished carmen has arrived to examine 2 artifacts found in the structure on lot 5!! first, he looks at the copper pieces alex found in the sifting box!! 	Forsyth S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN January 31
first, he looks at the copper pieces alex found in the sifting box!! carmen thinks he can see a bit of a pattern on the pieces and wonders if they could be off of a small chest?? secondly, he takes a look at the iron pieces also found in the structure and says they look to be off of a metal strap that would secure a box that could be a cash box!! emmas test results show there is two layers of metal here comprised of iron and lead and they are from the same era as the phips artifacts!! - over in the money pit area the team continues to drill borehole 1.25-6.25 and at 180 ft down hits a void and the core contains wood that has come out of the void!! 	Forsyth S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN January 31
1.25-6.25 and at 180 ft down hits a void and the core contains wood that has come out of the void!! the last core hits the table from 210 ft down and sadly they hit bedrock and not a vault . discouraged they call it a day so they can decide what their next move will be!! meanwhile while on lot 5 as they continue digging in the bottom of the structure moya digs up a 2nd beadlike the 1 st one found last week!! the beads are believed to be venetian so more research is needed!! while sifting new archaeologist lindy finds what looks to be a copper coin!! 	Forsyth S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN January 31
while sifting new archaeologist lindy finds what looks to be a copper coin!! there is no milled edge on the piece so it could be from the 17 th century or earlier!! it will go to the ct scanner for analysis!! - the episode ends the following morning in the southeast corner of the swamp where billy is digging but gary is finding no metal!! however, gary picks up what looks like a barrel stave and they wonder if this piece could be related to the barrel parts found in the swamp in the past!! it will be c-14 tested!! at this point, billy hits a large bolder and marty digs around it with a shovel to find this bolder is similar to the rocks on the stone road!! 	Forsyth S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN January 31
and marty digs around it with a shovel to find this bolder is similar to the rocks on the stone road!! billy believes this could be the edge of a retaining wall!! it will be tested!! marty says, keep digging and watch for more rocks!! gary then picks up more pieces of wood and marty agrees one looks like a handle off of a pickaxe !! it will be tested!! billy hits more rocks that are in line with the stone road!! marty declares there could be something important here so lets talk to rick and the others about what our next move should be!! 	Forsyth S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN January 31
a new day on oak island finds the team meeting in the war room to discuss putting down some caissons in the money pit area!! because of the flow of water into the garden shaft, the shaft was finished too late in the year to pinpoint the targets needed to warrant the use of caissons this year!! also, the whole area is needed by dumas in order for them to continue work on the garden shaft!! dumas has stopped the flow of water and has reached the 95 ft level at the bottom of the shaft!! they are now ready to drill the first borehole into the bottom of the shaft in search of the tunnel the team believes to be there!! 	Forsyth S11E13: TEA TIME Febuary, 2024
drill the first borehole into the bottom of the shaft in search of the tunnel the team believes to be there!! as the team leaves the war room to get back to work they decide they will leave the caissons until next year!! guess that means a season 12?? - later that afternoon in the southeast corner of the swamp as billy is digging he comes across 4 large rocks in a straight line that, craig says, is not natural and he believes this to be an extension of the stone road!! they can clearly see that this area of the road slopes towards the beach!! 	Forsyth S11E13: TEA TIME Febuary, 2024
they can clearly see that this area of the road slopes towards the beach!! could it be there was a small wharf at the end of the stone road?? - over in the money pit area the team has begun the drilling of new borehole hi-6.75 which is just 2 ft from hole h-8 where they once found pieces of parchment and at 170 ft down potentially hit a chest or vault they believe they pushed farther down and to the side!! another core hits the table as they continue drilling to 171 ft down!! meanwhile while in the interpretive center the team meet laird and emma to get the test results of the coin and 2nd bead found in the foundation of the circular structure on lot 5 last week!! 	Forsyth S11E13: TEA TIME Febuary, 2024
test results of the coin and 2nd bead found in the foundation of the circular structure on lot 5 last week!! the scanning results show the coin to be an english 1/2 penny with the head of king george visible on the right side and words in latin on the left!! laird dates it around 1770!! emma believes the bead to be what was called a stretch bead as the glass was heated and stretched into tubes and then cut into individual beads!! they agreed the artifact is venetian and was also used as currency!! they decide the 2 beads should go to an expert to be examined!! 	Forsyth S11E13: TEA TIME Febuary, 2024
they decide the 2 beads should go to an expert to be examined!! - another new day arrives and we find billy again digging in the southeast corner of the swamp near the beach!! rick picks up 2 pieces of what gary says is ancient fine chinese pottery blue and white in color!! the pieces fit together perfectly so are obviously from the same artifact!! rick then pulls a larger piece out of billys bucket this piece gary thinks is either a tea cup or a bowl!! several more pieces are found and they will all go to the lab!! gary says, this is a swamp tea party and he is gary potter . 	Forsyth S11E13: TEA TIME Febuary, 2024
gary says, this is a swamp tea party and he is gary potter . - back in the money pit area the team continued the drilling of borehole h i - 6.75 they opened up a core to find a piece of pvc pipe which can only mean the drill has gone off to the side and hit another borehole!! marty declares they will move the rig and drill a new hole!! - meanwhile, jack and charles are on their way to halifax 50 miles northeast to see an expert about the 2 beads found on lot 5!! they enter the shop of philip doucette who upon examining the beads is 100% sure they are venetian stretched glass!! 	Forsyth S11E13: TEA TIME Febuary, 2024
they enter the shop of philip doucette who upon examining the beads is 100% sure they are venetian stretched glass!! they were used in the 1500s - 1650s for necklaces and bracelets and also as valuable currency!! phil points out the beads were brought to north america by the portuguese for trading purposes!! thanking phil they leave the shop wondering what else they will find on lot 5. - we return to the southeast corner of the swamp where gary has just picked up more pottery different from the pieces found earlier!! this pottery is black and tan in color and is glazed!! 	Forsyth S11E13: TEA TIME Febuary, 2024
this pottery is black and tan in color and is glazed!! more pieces of blue and white pottery is pulled up and all will be tested!! rick then digs out a piece of leather that looks to be the heel of a boot or shoe!! gary points out that the sole is attached but square shanked nails making it very old!! excited by the find rick rushes it right to the lab!! - the episode ends in the money pit area where dumas has finally hit 95 ft down in the shaft and is ready to drill the first borehole into the bottom!! 	Forsyth S11E13: TEA TIME Febuary, 2024
dumas has finally hit 95 ft down in the shaft and is ready to drill the first borehole into the bottom!! they drill on an angle and at 95 ft they a crunching of metal and paul believes they have hit wood!! having drilled in 7 ft they bring up a core that contains a tube of wood and clay 6 in length!! believing they may have hit the tunnel marty instructs dumas to now drill in the north corner of the shaft!! the wood will be c- 14 tested!! marty declares this wood sample means we are still in the game so lets move on!! 	Forsyth S11E13: TEA TIME Febuary, 2024
as the sun rises in the money pit area of oak island the team is getting an update from paul of the dumas team on the progress in the garden shaft!! they have just finished drilling 2 boreholes into the bottom of the shaft and the 1st hit what they believe to be a wall and the 2nd hit nothing!! they will noe assemble the final set in the shaft bringing it down to 95 ft !! the team leaves so dumas can get back to work!! - 60ft to the southwest the team is now drilling a borehole into hole h-8 where they believe they hit the chappell vault a few years ago!! 	Forsyth S11E14: RICK & MORTAR Febuary 14, 2024
team is now drilling a borehole into hole h-8 where they believe they hit the chappell vault a few years ago!! when drilling h-8 the debris from the hole fell down onto the vault, they believe, causing the hole to be plugged!! they now desire to retrieve a sample of the soil in the plug in order to determine if it warrants putting a large caisson down h-8!! their aim is to recover the vault if it is there!! - over in the southeast corner of the swamp billy is now doing a large-scale dig and going deeper than before!! the team is having a hard time as the deeper dig is very stinky good thing marty isnt there . 	Forsyth S11E14: RICK & MORTAR Febuary 14, 2024
the team is having a hard time as the deeper dig is very stinky good thing marty isnt there . they suddenly hear the scraping of metal on something and find a large cone-shaped bolder under the bucket!! the bolder is sitting on top of the peat so that means it was placed here by man and not glacial!! billy then hits more rocks that resemble a staircase going up the hill from the bolder!! rick wonders if this could be a platform at the end of stone road!! gary picks up a 4ft long shaped board from 2ft down with no fasteners!! 	Forsyth S11E14: RICK & MORTAR Febuary 14, 2024
gary picks up a 4ft long shaped board from 2ft down with no fasteners!! thinking it could be a ship\'s plank they will test it!! - later that afternoon on lot 5 the archaeologists are continuing their dig on the circular structure!! jamie has now come to the conclusion that the structure is too large to be a family home and believes its possible that multiple groups have used the structure in different time periods!! they will continue digging now in order to define the edge of the foundation!! as jack sifts through the spoils and finds more pottery and glass that will be tested jamie hits what feels and looks like concrete or mortar on the bottom of the foundation!! 	Forsyth S11E14: RICK & MORTAR Febuary 14, 2024
glass that will be tested jamie hits what feels and looks like concrete or mortar on the bottom of the foundation!! they call laird and upon his arrival, jack points out that this area resembles the concrete or mortar found on hole rf-1 in the money pit area!! jamie bags a sample of the material and laird takes it right to the lab for testing!! - the following morning the team is continuing the drilling of borehole h-8 and a long core comes up from 211 ft down that seems to be full of water!! terrys beeper goes off and he cleans off a piece of metal that, he says, could be a part of the vault!! 	Forsyth S11E14: RICK & MORTAR Febuary 14, 2024
beeper goes off and he cleans off a piece of metal that, he says, could be a part of the vault!! they now need to determine where to drill next in hopes of reaching the vault!! meanwhile while in the dumas trailer, the team has gathered to get the c-14 test results from craig who along with marty is present via video!! this wood sample was found in the bottom of the garden shaft last week!! the largest percentage shows the wood to be from 1631-1684 making it pre-searcher and possibly original work!! since this could make the tunnel at the bottom of the shaft 400 years old rick is determined to find that tunnel so dumas gets back to it!! 	Forsyth S11E14: RICK & MORTAR Febuary 14, 2024
the bottom of the shaft 400 years old rick is determined to find that tunnel so dumas gets back to it!! - the next morning as billy digs north of the stone road gary picks up a 4ft long tongue and grooved plank that will be tested!! just as gary declares this area is very sloppy jack notices a rock in billys bucket and billy says there are lots of rocks here that are aligned w the bolder!! as rick arrives they all wonder if these rocks could be a ramp& jack points out again that the bolder is conical in shape like the nolans cross boulders!! 	Forsyth S11E14: RICK & MORTAR Febuary 14, 2024
rocks could be a ramp& jack points out again that the bolder is conical in shape like the nolans cross boulders!! rick tells billy to dig on both sides of the bolder so they can get closer to clean it off and get a better look!! - later in the interpretive center the team meets with emma and laird to get the test results of the concrete found on lot 5!! emma informs them that the sample is not mortar but it does match the soil from borehole c-28.5 in the money pit area!! this sample of soil is from 104 ft down and comes from near the tunnel at the bottom of the garden shaft!! 	Forsyth S11E14: RICK & MORTAR Febuary 14, 2024
sample of soil is from 104 ft down and comes from near the tunnel at the bottom of the garden shaft!! laird says this soil is not natural to the circular structure and alex wonders if this soil was moved from one place to another!! they will do more testing in order to determine if these two soil samples are related!! laird declares we need to figure out what this structure is on lot 5 and rick says keep digging!! will they finally hit the treasure tunnel next week?? join us then to find out and remember to watch our facebook page for any updates on our podcasts!! 	Forsyth S11E14: RICK & MORTAR Febuary 14, 2024
as a new week begins on oak island we find the team in the southeast corner of the swamp where ian is examining the large cone shaped stone and the rocks surrounding it found last week!! ian asks billy to wash off the area and he sees the rocks are in a line which makes him believe this structure is man-made!! ian then states that these rocks look like they came from an excavation site deep in the ground!! jack wonders was that site here or somewhere else like the money pit?? steve arrives and says this looks like a ramp of some sort!! 	Forsyth S11E15:  ON TARGET February 21, 2024
steve arrives and says this looks like a ramp of some sort!! rick tells billy to keep digging!! - over in the garden shaft area the team is watching dumas at work at the bottom of the shaft via camera!! scott informs them that dumas has reached 92 ft down so they are now 1-2 ft above the tunnel!! as dumas continues to dig marty declares this could be an original or depositor tunnel!! - that afternoon we find scott and doug in halifax entering dawsons print shop with the piece of leather found in the swamp last week!! joe, who is an expert on ancient leather, examines the artifact and he says it is a shoe or light boot that would have been worn by an officer!! 	Forsyth S11E15:  ON TARGET February 21, 2024
examines the artifact and he says it is a shoe or light boot that would have been worn by an officer!! joe points out that the stitching is beautiful and probably done somewhere in europe but his guess is in france!! he adds the leather is tanned by using a vegetable and dates it between 1600- 1700 and is the toe of the boot!! pleased with joe,s assessment they leave for home!! meanwhile while back on oak island in the dumas trailer rick and marty are suiting up to make a trip to the bottom of the garden shaft!! the dumas team is now calling rick the silver fox!! 	Forsyth S11E15:  ON TARGET February 21, 2024
the dumas team is now calling rick the silver fox!! very appropriate i think !! upon arriving at the bottom of the shaft they see the team has reached 93ft down and must now clear away the packed clay before they can dig deeper!! paul hands rick a 60-pound jackhammer and tells him to get to work!! as rick works away at the clay he hits either rock or wood!! have they hit the tunnel?? marty says ok we have loosened the clay for you so get back to work!! paul and his team will now use the hammer grab to clear away the loose clay!! 	Forsyth S11E15:  ON TARGET February 21, 2024
paul and his team will now use the hammer grab to clear away the loose clay!! - a new day has dawned and in the war room the team is meeting with researcher, author and quest member christopher morford who has some new research results to present to them!! christopher informs them that he has discovered a direct line running from cone c to cone a on nolans cross to the garden shaft!! using the two cones plus two drilled stones he shows them on a map this is now important line!! he tells them that he along with corjan mol believes that solomons menorah once was hidden here for safekeeping!! 	Forsyth S11E15:  ON TARGET February 21, 2024
he tells them that he along with corjan mol believes that solomons menorah once was hidden here for safekeeping!! he is sure it is not here now however there is a chance the grail and the ark of the covenant were here also and at this time he doesnt know where they are!! could it be they are still on oak island?? rick says they will find and follow this line as they say thank you to christopher!! - the following morning on the beach of tom nolans property the team is looking down on cone c !! they will follow the line, as steve measures, from cone c to the first drilled stone, to cone a, to the second drilled stone and on to the garden shaft area!! 	Forsyth S11E15:  ON TARGET February 21, 2024
c to the first drilled stone, to cone a, to the second drilled stone and on to the garden shaft area!! all sites line up perfectly and end up not right at the garden shaft but, unbelievably right on top of the tunnel thats under the shaft!! has nolans cross led them to the treasure?? oh, we must be patient . - later as billy digs in the corner of the swamp he brings up a large tree stump!! assuming this means that trees once grew here ian is convinced that the swamp is man made!! they will keep digging!! - as the sun  rises the next morning we find the team digging in the middle and deepest area of the swamp!! 	Forsyth S11E15:  ON TARGET February 21, 2024
the sun  rises the next morning we find the team digging in the middle and deepest area of the swamp!! a heavy rain during the night has left the southeast corner flooded!! billy digs up. 2nd tree stump and looking at it closely they see axe marks on it where it had been chopped down!! there are no logs nearby so where they used to build the money pit?? they will have ian take a look!! - the episode ends in the dumas trailer where craig, scott and rick meet paul who tells them they have reached the 95ft depth and he believes they have hit the tunnel!! 	Forsyth S11E15:  ON TARGET February 21, 2024
and rick meet paul who tells them they have reached the 95ft depth and he believes they have hit the tunnel!! as craig watches via camera rick and scott along with paul descend the ladder to the bottom of the shaft!! they find the team has dug a hole about 1-foot square and rick starts to probe it with a rod!! he hits what are definitely round logs and under them, it sounds hollow!! rick and scott leave as rick remembers reading about round logs in the money pit in the readers digest in 1965!! dumas agrees to dig in one more section of shaft and they all wonder if they are now looking at the invasive tunnel!! 	Forsyth S11E15:  ON TARGET February 21, 2024
its a foggy morning in the middle of the swamp where the deepest area is and billy is digging bringing up more large tree stumps!! billy says the two layers are where the stumps are!! ian asks billy to expose the stumps and they see they are definitely axe cut so ian takes samples for c-14 testing to determine their age!! - over at the garden shaft scott is getting an update from roger and he states they are now 97ft down and finishing up the last section!! he says they have found rounded logs under the area that rick was poking on last week!! 	Forsyth S11E16: DARK & STORMY March 29, 2024
he says they have found rounded logs under the area that rick was poking on last week!! is this proof the tunnel is real?? - in the war room the team is meeting with aaron satkoski a colleague of ians who has performed isotope tests on 1 piece of wood and a pickaxe found earlier between holes rf-1 and h-8 where there is a void!! aaron informs them the tests show these two pieces are from either southeast france, northern italy, or coastal norway!! doug points out that the lead in the lead cross came from a 14th-century mine in southern france!! 	Forsyth S11E16: DARK & STORMY March 29, 2024
doug points out that the lead in the lead cross came from a 14th-century mine in southern france!! could the templars be responsible for putting the wood and the pickaxe here?? rick decides they will revisit hole rf-1 and go deeper to see if they have missed anything!! meanwhile while on lot 5 the archaeologists are continuing their dig on the foundation under the circular structure and gary is detecting the spoils!! the beeper goes off and gary pulls up a little fancy flat button that looks to be silver or pewter that could be an officer button from the 1600s-early 1800s!! 	Forsyth S11E16: DARK & STORMY March 29, 2024
little fancy flat button that looks to be silver or pewter that could be an officer button from the 1600s-early 1800s!! the beeper goes off again and up comes a cuff button also flat and has a design of 3 cannons and 3 dots on it!! gary dates this to around 1700 or older!! off to the lab, they go!! - the next morning finds the team in the interpretive center meeting with emiliano saccetti in italy visiting video!! first rick reads the results of the c-14 tests on the stumps from the swamp!! it shows 54.1%- 1346-1396 and 41% - 1296-1328!! 	Forsyth S11E16: DARK & STORMY March 29, 2024
it shows 54.1%- 1346-1396 and 41% - 1296-1328!! rick points out that the stumps are axe cut and these dates may prove someone was here in the 1200s building something!! turning to emiliano rick shows him pictures of the stone triangle on the north shore that was destroyed by drumfield and of the stone cairns on lot 15!! they will send emiliano the coordinates of these two sites so he can pass them on to professor adriano gaspani the expert who dates nolans cross from the 1200s by aligning the cross with the stars!! will the dates match?? - that afternoon in the money pit area a core hits the table from 199ft doin borehole f.75-825 at the bottom of hole rf-1!! 	Forsyth S11E16: DARK & STORMY March 29, 2024
in the money pit area a core hits the table from 199ft doin borehole f.75-825 at the bottom of hole rf-1!! they found wood at 155ft down but sadly they now find pvc pipe which means the drill went off course into an old borehole!! they will decide where to drill a new borehole!! - later alex arrives at the garden shaft to get an update from roger and is informed that they are 97ft down and they are installing the steel and wood panels of the final set, and it will take 2 more days then they can dig deeper!! 	Forsyth S11E16: DARK & STORMY March 29, 2024
the steel and wood panels of the final set, and it will take 2 more days then they can dig deeper!! they get back to work!! - episode 16 ens the following morning in the war room where rick is telling the team that they have 2 days to batten down the hatches before hurricane lee hits!! billy points out its the speed of the hurricane that is most dangerous and there will be wind, rain and flood damage to deal with!! they will do all they can to protect the work in the swamp, the garden shaft and on lot 5 but, rick says, they must shut down!! 	Forsyth S11E16: DARK & STORMY March 29, 2024
episode 17 begins with rick, alex and jack returning to oak island after hurricane lee!! they find the causeway intact but the swamp has 3-4 ft of water in it!! as they start the drainage pipes rick says it will take one week to completely drain the swamp!! they go on to the money pit area where they meet up with roger from dumas and with a smile on his face he informs them he has good news!! there was no damage to the garden shaft during the storm and they were able to dig the day before down to 99ft!! 	Forsyth S11E17 - PILING ON !!
no damage to the garden shaft during the storm and they were able to dig the day before down to 99ft!! the plan now is to expose the 7ft high tunnel below the shaft!! - later that afternoon the team meets in the war room with their contact in italy emiliano who has arrived on the island and professor gaspani an expert archeoastronomer, via video, from italy!! the team had sent professor gaspani the exact coordinates of the 5 stone cairns on lot 15 and of the stone triangle that was demolished by researchers in the past!! by aligning these structures with the stars the professor has been able to date them to 1250ad just 50 years later than nolans cross!! 	Forsyth S11E17 - PILING ON !!
structures with the stars the professor has been able to date them to 1250ad just 50 years later than nolans cross!! professional gaspani believes the 5 stone cairns, the stone triangle and nolans cross were made by the same people!! professional says this was a secret not everyone was to know!! the 5 cairns line up with the sun and moon in the night sky and the triangle aligns with the winter solstice!! professor gaspani says this is not a coincidence!! as the team says goodbye to the professor marty informs him they will have more questions in the future!! also when asked by rick who made these stone structures professor answers simply the templars . 	Forsyth S11E17 - PILING ON !!
also when asked by rick who made these stone structures professor answers simply the templars . - the following morning in the money pit area the team continues the drilling of borehole f.25.8.25 where they are going down 150ft!! a core hits the table and unfortunately upon opening it they find nothing!! - over on lot 15 gary and jack are detecting the stone cairns that were originally pyramid shaped!! jack digs up a 3-inch long lead strip that gary says is decorated and is medieval!! they take it right to the lab!! - back at the garden shaft scott gets an update from roger !! 	Forsyth S11E17 - PILING ON !!
they take it right to the lab!! - back at the garden shaft scott gets an update from roger !! he informs scott they have uncovered a large section of the tunnel at 100ft down!! as they go down the ladder roger says there is lots of large beams of wood!! scott sees planks 12-14 inches across with rounded edges!! rick arrives and is happy with what he sees!! roger suggests that gary do some metal detecting and steve will do some gps measurements that will finally give them the exact coordinates of the tunnel!! a short time later garys beeper goes off and he picks up a piece of iron wiring that roger says is nothing dumas would use so this could be original!! 	Forsyth S11E17 - PILING ON !!
he picks up a piece of iron wiring that roger says is nothing dumas would use so this could be original!! gary offers to help steve with his measurement results of which we will get later!! - back at borehole f.25.8.25 a core comes up in which they find a lot of wood in the bottom and firm soil on the top!! terry believes they are on the edge of something!! a second core comes up from 171ft down and upon examination they see they have hit bedrock!! they are disappointed but charles reminds them there are more areas to drill!! 	Forsyth S11E17 - PILING ON !!
they are disappointed but charles reminds them there are more areas to drill!! - an exciting new day begins at the garden shaft as the dumas team brings up a plank about 5ft long with rounded sides and they can see its been cut with an adze!! gary finds no metal in it and rick states that the first horizontal dig is yet to come into the tunnel!! - the episode ends in the lab where the team meets with laird and emma to get the results of testing on the piece of lead from lot 15!! emma informs them this piece matches up with the 2-3 inch long rod with a spiral design found on lot 13 in 2021 !! 	Forsyth S11E17 - PILING ON !!
episode 2 begins in the early morning at the money pit area where they are drilling borehole d.5n-26.5 20 ft from the eastern side of the garden shaft!! this is within the 20 ft radius where ian believes, the treasure could be they are looking for artifacts that could lead them to a tunnel under the garden shaft!! - over on the west side of lot 5 laird and his team are digging on the circular structure and marty arrives with the backhoe to lift the large rocks  out of the center of the structure!! as the rocks are removed laird is able to see a part of a side wall!! 	Forsyth S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING November 15, 2023
as the rocks are removed laird is able to see a part of a side wall!! the archaeologists go back to digging and jamie finds the largest artifact found in the structure so far in the side wall!! it is a piece of course anglo american pottery that laird believes to be from a large cooking pot from around 1770!! less than 100 yards away gary and rick are metal detecting and rick digs up a piece of metal gary says could be a decorative strap off of a box or chest !! next rick digs up a piece of heavy metal that looks like a handmade fastener!! 	Forsyth S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING November 15, 2023
next rick digs up a piece of heavy metal that looks like a handmade fastener!! both pieces will be put into the ct scanner to get a clear view of what they are then carmen will have a look at them . - later that afternoon in the money pit area a core from 108 ft down comes up from borehole d.5n-26,5 !! as marty and alex join them they find a section of a wooden beam from 106 ft down!! the till is soft and slushy and since they are east of the garden shaft terry believes a tunnel runs under the shaft into the baby blob!! 	Forsyth S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING November 15, 2023
and since they are east of the garden shaft terry believes a tunnel runs under the shaft into the baby blob!! marty says lets c-14 test the wood and keep following this line!! pick a new hole!! - its morning and in the interpretive center carmen is examining the recent finds from lot 5 that rick and gary found last week and the day before!! he first looks at the latch or as he calls it wedge through the ct scanner and says because it does not have a mushroom top on it it was likely put into wood and left there!! 	Forsyth S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING November 15, 2023
and says because it does not have a mushroom top on it it was likely put into wood and left there!! emma says the metal is old and matches the metal of artifacts belonging to william phips which are from the 17th century!! the 2nd artifact, carmen says, is much older and is the piece of a chisel used for mining or tunneling!! emma says no modern metal here!! the 3rd artifact carmen calls a bow tie strap that could have decorated a chest and it is french and pre-dates the 17th century!! jack points out this was found near where the hatch would be on zenas map!! 	Forsyth S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING November 15, 2023
jack points out this was found near where the hatch would be on zenas map!! does this mean templar baby . carmen states he has yet to see artifacts like the ones found on oak island anywhere else!! what could this mean . - back at the money pit a core comes up from 98 ft down out of the new borehole d.5n-25.5!! ian points out the till is soft and a different color which means this area has been disturbed!! a 2nd core arrives from 1041/2 ft down and contains many bits of wood!! as craig and scott arrive steve says he believes they are inside a tunnel!! 	Forsyth S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING November 15, 2023
as craig and scott arrive steve says he believes they are inside a tunnel!! craig agrees and is sure it points to the garden shaft and is not a searcher tunnel!! craig says to drill another hole closer to the garden shaft!! - episode 2 ends in the interpretive center where emma is giving the team the c-14 test results of the wood found in boreholes dn-12 and d.5n-26.5!! they show potassium and aluminum which is usual but they also show palladium not usually found especially at this depth!! moya, a new team member and metal specialist, says palladium is a precious metal found in jewelry from as far back as egyptian times!! 	Forsyth S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING November 15, 2023
as a new day begins on oak island in the money pit area the team is drilling new borehole d5n-24.5 28 ft east of the garden shaft!! they are continuing their search for the tunnel they believe is there along with the source of the precious metals found in this area!! the team is waiting for dumas mining to obtain the permits needed to dig deeper in the garden shaft down to 98 ft!! their aims are to see if there is treasure at the bottom of the shaft and to intercept the tunnel!! - over in the war room the team is meeting to get the c-14 test results of the wood found in borehole d5n-26.5 found last week!! 	Forsyth S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT November, 2023
room the team is meeting to get the c-14 test results of the wood found in borehole d5n-26.5 found last week!! craig reads there is signs of precious metals in the wood and the dates are 55%-1735-1804, 24.7%-1656-1684, and 15.2%-1929-1950!! charles points out that the 55% dates corresponds with the time they believe the duc d anville may have buried treasure on oak island!! marty says, the wood is not from searchers tunnels as it pre-dates the finding of the money pit in 1795!! rick points out that the artifacts found on lot 5 also test to these dates!! they will continue the search on lot 5 for more artifacts and go after the tunnel under the garden shaft!! 	Forsyth S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT November, 2023
they will continue the search on lot 5 for more artifacts and go after the tunnel under the garden shaft!! - at the money pit a core from 68 ft down comes up from hole d5n-24.5 and shows, terry says, unusually soft till and indicates a tunnel!! they are 25ft above their target depth!! - mean while on lot 5 gary and rick are metal detecting in the spoils from the circular structure!! rick digs up, gary says, is an old military shot from the 1700s!! it will be tested!! next rick digs up what helen believes to be the sight off of a gun!! 	Forsyth S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT November, 2023
it will be tested!! next rick digs up what helen believes to be the sight off of a gun!! gary agrees it is off of a gun!! they take it right to emma for testing!! - the following morning the team meets in the war room with the dumas mining company, via video, concerning the permits needed to deepen the garden shaft and to drill sideways into any tunnels found!! dumas reports that all requests have been sent to the nova scotia government and they expect the permits to be issued by months end enabling them to be on site early this summer!! 	Forsyth S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT November, 2023
government and they expect the permits to be issued by months end enabling them to be on site early this summer!! - back on lot 5 the archaeologists are digging in the deep walled structure found around large tree roots last year!! helen believes that artifacts were buried here in the past to be hidden for safe keeping!! this was often done in this time period of the 1700s!! fiona, while sifting finds what helen believes to be a small piece of creamware pottery from the 1700s!! it will be tested!! - later that afternoon the team is in the interpretive center getting test results of the metal piece found earlier on lot 5!! 	Forsyth S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT November, 2023
that afternoon the team is in the interpretive center getting test results of the metal piece found earlier on lot 5!! laird says, it is a ramrod guide used to push musket balls into the gun and is from the 1600s-1800s!! they put it in the ct scanner and it shows roman numerals viiii on the right side similar to those found in smiths cove years before!! laird says this could be a regiment number and wonders if this artifact connects to smiths cove in anyway!! as gary sets out to find the rest of the ramrod on lot 5 emma will do more research on the artifact!! 	Forsyth S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT November, 2023
gary sets out to find the rest of the ramrod on lot 5 emma will do more research on the artifact!! - back at the money pit a core comes up from hole d5n-24.5 that holds two sections of a beam that when terry measures it is 7 and 1/2 ft high!! rick arrives and points out the beam was cut with an adze making it very old!! alex reminds them that the templar tunnels in italy were also 7ft tall and that there had to have been a large shaft put down here in order to build this size of a tunnel!! 	Forsyth S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT November, 2023
that there had to have been a large shaft put down here in order to build this size of a tunnel!! rick asks them to get paul to bring down the 120 high definition camera to take a look down the borehole!! a short time later steve drops the camera down and at 7 and 1/2 meters down they find black murky water obviously stirred up by the drilling!! they decide to follow the tunnel by drilling another borehole at the 27 ft line then examine the area in between the 2 holes!! the show ends with rick wondering why would anyone go to this much work?? 	Forsyth S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT November, 2023
its a new day on oak island and in the money pit area, the team has begun the drilling of new borehole d.5n- 27!! they are continuing their investigation into the 7 and 1/2 ft high tunnel 100 ft down under the garden shaft that they believe runs to the baby blob!! a core comes up from 53 ft down and terry states that the soil is soft so they are close to the tunnel!! mean while in the war room, the team gathers to meet with dumas mining via video!! dumas announces that they have received the code of practice or permits needed to continue the dig in the garden shaft!! 	Forsyth S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY November 29, 2023
dumas announces that they have received the code of practice or permits needed to continue the dig in the garden shaft!! they informed rick and the team they are now preparing to leave for oak island and will see them soon. rick replies, we will be ready for you!! - over on lot 5 at the shoreline gary and peter are metal detecting and peter digs up what gary says is an old cribbing spike that would have been used on wharves, ships and even on shafts and tunnels!! gary points out this is an old raw iron and this has never been found on this side of the island before!! 	Forsyth S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY November 29, 2023
points out this is an old raw iron and this has never been found on this side of the island before!! next, peter digs up what looks like 1/2 of a handle from an old pair of shears or scissors similar to the ones found in 1970 by dan blankenship dated from the 17th century!! they will have carmen examine the handle!! - 50 yards inland at the rectangular structure helen is telling jack that in her 40 years of fieldwork, she has never found a foundation this deep in the ground!! what does this mean?? as jack begins to sift the spoils jamie digs up another small piece of creamware pottery she dates around 1762!! 	Forsyth S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY November 29, 2023
as jack begins to sift the spoils jamie digs up another small piece of creamware pottery she dates around 1762!! - back at the monet pit area a core comes up from 95 ft down in borehole d.5n-27!! steve says the wood in this core looks different from the wood found here before and they have not found wood at this high a depth before!! could this be a completely different structure from the tunnel like perhaps an offset chamber?? rick brings up the fact that when dumas starts to dig their crane must go here so they only have time to dig one more hole for now!! 	Forsyth S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY November 29, 2023
dumas starts to dig their crane must go here so they only have time to dig one more hole for now!! - over on the causeway there is lots of noise as dumas arrives with their big equipment and permits in hand!! all are excited as rick welcomes them begging them to get that crane set up so the dig in the garden shaft can begin!! it will be a few days before they can start . - at the money pit the team is drilling new borehole c5n-27 in hopes of finding more of the tunnel they have been following!! 	Forsyth S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY November 29, 2023
money pit the team is drilling new borehole c5n-27 in hopes of finding more of the tunnel they have been following!! finding it would be of great help to dumas as they dig 20 more feet into the garden shaft!! - over in the interpretive center carmen has arrived to examine the shear handle found earlier!! he confirms gary is right this is a handle off of an old pair of scissors from around the 1600s to early 1700s older than the set dan found in 1970!! gary will try to find more of this set!! - alex arrives at the rectangular structure on lot 5 and helen informs him the creamware found here from 1740-1760 pre-dates the finding of the money pit and also the dividing of the island into lots!! 	Forsyth S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY November 29, 2023
creamware found here from 1740-1760 pre-dates the finding of the money pit and also the dividing of the island into lots!! she adds that this structure is rock-lined with loose rubble in the center and no artifacts in the top layer!! this tells her that this structure was covered up at one time!! why is the question?? - that afternoon at the money pit a core comes up from 93ft down in hole c5n-27 the soil if firm but has nothing in it !! the rod then drops down to 104 ft meaning there is a void here!! they find no wood at this depth!! 	Forsyth S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY November 29, 2023
they find no wood at this depth!! a core from 111ft down hits the table and contains pieces of a beam that is axe cut and terry says pre-dates 1795!! a 2nd core is full of wood fiber!! craig wonders if this is the roof of a collapsed tunnel?? they will c-14 test the wood!! - a short time later the team gathers at the garden shaft with dumas for the opening of the shaft. as rick states they have unfinished business here he hands dan hensky the keys to give to roger from dumas who then opens the door to the shaft!! 	Forsyth S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY November 29, 2023
its a new day of fresh excitement on oak island as the team gathers in the money pit area to finally put the high definition camera down borehole l-14 to 140 - 142 ft in order to get a good look at aladdins cave!! steve lowers the camera down l-14, which pierces the cave, they reach the cavity where they can see a ledge and walls that are very distinct!! blain carr, who is a sonar expert, says this is a large opening as was seen on the muon maps!! blain asks steve to move the camera so they can see under the ledge into the bottom of the cavity!! 	Forsyth S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING December 13, 2024
blain asks steve to move the camera so they can see under the ledge into the bottom of the cavity!! he is pleased that the visibility is so good and says it is clear enough for a sonar scan, so they bring up the camera!! - later in the interpretive center laird and jamie are showing the results of the magnetometer scan performed last week on the circular structure on lot 5!! jamie says these results suggest there is a larger circular structure under the main structure that can be seen on the top!! jamie believes this could mean that people lived on this spot for a while and at different times!! 	Forsyth S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING December 13, 2024
jamie believes this could mean that people lived on this spot for a while and at different times!! she is anxious for the archaeologists team to get digging here to see what it is and to find the time period in which the structures were built!! - the following morning charles meets paul, from dumas, to get an update on the progress of the deepening of the garden shaft!! paul explains they are now putting in place a metal frame they call a shoe that will protect the men in the shaft while its being dug!! it will take about 2 hours to get the shoe in place then they will begin ti dig!! 	Forsyth S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING December 13, 2024
it will take about 2 hours to get the shoe in place then they will begin ti dig!! charles leaves them to it!! meanwhile while on lot 5 the team is digging in the circular structure and fiona digs up some old pottery and while sifting the spoils jack finds a hand-cut rose rose-haded fastener from, jamie says, the 1700s!! it will go to the ct scanner!! fiona then digs up a 3-inch hollow metal rod in the shape of a t that jamie thinks could be the handle of a tool!! it too goes to the lab!! - over in the money pit area the team is about to put the sonar scanner down borehole l-14 in order to determine the size of aladdins cave and to produce a map of the area!! 	Forsyth S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING December 13, 2024
scanner down borehole l-14 in order to determine the size of aladdins cave and to produce a map of the area!! after the scanner goes down blair says they will let it run till morning in order to get the full scope of the cavity!! - later doug and laird arrive at the nova tactical co. in dartmouth to meet with weapons expert jeff parker!! they have brought with them the metal ramrod guide found on lot 5!, jeff says the guide is from a small rifle or a hand gun from the 1500s to late 1700s!! doug points out this matches the dates that william phips buried treasure on oak island!! 	Forsyth S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING December 13, 2024
doug points out this matches the dates that william phips buried treasure on oak island!! jeff has no idea what the roman numerals viiii are for as they are not typically found on guns!! - the next morning at borehole l-14 in the money pit area the team studies the monitor of the sonar scanner that sits 2ft off the bottom of aladdins cave 150ft down!! blain says it is possible the cave has been carved out by man and it seems to show an opening into the cave!! blain will take the scanner home to study the full results then report to the team!! 	Forsyth S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING December 13, 2024
blain will take the scanner home to study the full results then report to the team!! - in the interpretive center emma and laird have examined the 2 artifacts found on lot 5 the day before in the circular structure!! the 2nd item shows 2 rivet holes pointing this to be the handle of a tool!! emma says it is old and dates around the same time as the william phips artifacts!! the 1st item found believed to be a fastener also is old and dates the same as the handle!! marty wonders if the circular structure could have been a staging area for phips and rick says more research is needed!! 	Forsyth S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING December 13, 2024
marty wonders if the circular structure could have been a staging area for phips and rick says more research is needed!! another week closes in the war room with blair carr giving the team the full sonar results of aladdins cave!! the 3d image shows sloping walls making it impossible to see the bottom!! they can clearly see the opening they hope is an entrance!! blain explains that the floor slopes away so if any treasure is there it would be at the bottom of the slope!! blain wants to drill another borehole 5-6 ft over and put the scanner down so he can see into the cave backward!! 	Forsyth S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING December 13, 2024
its a new day of excitement in the money pit area as marty and rick arrive in the dumas trailer for a meeting with roger !! roger shows them on a wall map that there is water coming into the garden shaft through one wall!! roger points out that so far the water has not damaged the shaft but they need to fix it right away!! rick and marty suit up to go into the shaft with roger to take a look for themselves!! standing 87ft down in the shaft with water pouring in the wall on their right roger explains they will drill 8 holes in the wall in which the water is flowing then fill them along with any cracks with urethane or expanding foam as we know it!! 	Forsyth S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD December 20, 2023
which the water is flowing then fill them along with any cracks with urethane or expanding foam as we know it!! it is everyones hope that when they reach the depth of the tunnel they believe is just a few feet below the bottom of the shaft dumas will be able to drill sideways into the tunnel . marty declares lets get at it!! - later that morning the team meets in the war room with ian spooner and his team to get the results of the fluorescence spectrometer testing of the water in all the boreholes they have drilled around the garden shaft!! 	Forsyth S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD December 20, 2023
the results of the fluorescence spectrometer testing of the water in all the boreholes they have drilled around the garden shaft!! all the wells show signs of organic material and especially interesting is the wood as it wouldnt be in the ground that deep naturally!! one hole, l-16, very clearly shows a large void beneath it!! could this be martys aladdins cave?? l-16 shows high samples of organic matter and the team knows of no human activity at this depth before!! so how did the wood get there!! ian wonders if there is a tunnel here leading in and out of the cavity?? 	Forsyth S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD December 20, 2023
ian wonders if there is a tunnel here leading in and out of the cavity?? scott suggests they drill a new borehole at the opposite end of the cavity to see what is on that side!! 1st they will take another look down into aladdins cave!! - later that afternoon in the money pit area the team is drilling a new borehole kl-14.5 just 10ft northwest of hole l-16!! a core from 83ft down hits the table and they find solid tight clay that terry says is good for tunneling!! they will go deeper!! - meanwhile in the interpretive center carmen has arrived to examine 2 of the artifacts found on lot 5 near the circular structure!! 	Forsyth S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD December 20, 2023
in the interpretive center carmen has arrived to examine 2 of the artifacts found on lot 5 near the circular structure!! the 1st item, carmen says, is what he calls a scupper nail used to hold down decking like on a ship!! the spike would sit below the decking and is from the early 1600s - 1700s& also has been exposed to salt water!! the 2nd item is the handle off of a ladle that carmen points out dates before the building of the money pit!! peter reminds everyone that these artifacts date to the same time as the william phips artifacts!! 	Forsyth S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD December 20, 2023
peter reminds everyone that these artifacts date to the same time as the william phips artifacts!! - the following morning at the money pit the team continued the drilling of the new borehole kl-14.5 and at 142.5 ft they hit a void that fell to about 153ft down!! they decide to take a look inside the void so paul lowers the high definition camera and at 142ft they come into the void and on a ledge of a sidewall, they see what looks like a square headed bolt!! they need gary to do some metal detecting!! steve points out there is definitely a current in the void so they need to map the cavity with the sonar which they will do in a few days!! 	Forsyth S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD December 20, 2023
in the void so they need to map the cavity with the sonar which they will do in a few days!! - one-half mile to the left the archaeological team is digging in the circular structure hoping to find out how extensive and how old the structure is!! while sifting the spoils helen and jack find 2 square nails that will go to the ct scanner!! jamie then digs up a piece of a strap hinge for a door!! jamie also finds a large nail!! both items will go to the lab!! - the following morning brings a heavy tropical storm to southern nova scotia thus to oak island!! 	Forsyth S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD December 20, 2023
- the following morning brings a heavy tropical storm to southern nova scotia thus to oak island!! there are power outages, and flooding and homes have been pushed off their foundations!! one day later in the money pit area, marty and rick arrive at the garden shaft where roger informs them they have 30ft of standing water in the shaft . they know the water has been driven in by the storm but how?? it couldnt all have gotten in from the top opening so had to have entered from the bottom!! marty reminds them the original flood tunnel was 90ft down they are 87ft down, could they have hit it?? 	Forsyth S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD December 20, 2023
marty reminds them the original flood tunnel was 90ft down they are 87ft down, could they have hit it?? roger is worried that more voids could be behind the walls so he will bring in the engineers to examine the shaft before they move forward!! last year it was bone dry in this area!! have they hit the same booby trap found by the oslo company in the 1800s?? will they finally find martys offset chamber!! join us in 2 weeks to get the answers and in the meantime whatever you may be celebrating in your home may it be filled with family, friends and love. 	Forsyth S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD December 20, 2023
its a disappointing new day on oak island as the team gathers at the garden shaft to witness water pouring in through the side walls near the bottom of the shaft!! mother nature isnt bringing this water in so what made it start?? could it be a flood tunnel?? dumas has drilled small holes in the side walls to drain the water in hopes of finding the source of the water!! while doing this they came across a hole or void in a side wall that is completely dry!! dumas has to stop the flow of the water before they can take a look in this mysterious void!! 	Forsyth S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COST January 3, 2024
dumas has to stop the flow of the water before they can take a look in this mysterious void!! they will now start filling the holes and any cracks with foam to prevent more water from entering the shaft!! will they be able to stop this influx of water?? - over on lot 5 the archaeological team is examining the circular structure that is now full of water from the recent tropical storm!! while they are pumping the water they can, thankfully, work on the outer surfaces of the structure!! laird says it should be dry enough tomorrow to work in the center of the structure!! 	Forsyth S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COST January 3, 2024
laird says it should be dry enough tomorrow to work in the center of the structure!! - back in the money pit area the team is getting ready to put the sonar scanner down into aladdins cave!! the cave is 60 ft west of the garden shaft!! the scanner image shows that the cave looks to be the shape of a crescent moon& terry points out that there are sharp edges on the sides!! steve says the cave doesnt look natural and they are hoping to get a 3d image made from the scanner image!! they decide they will drill a new borehole west of the cave to see how far it goes!! 	Forsyth S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COST January 3, 2024
they decide they will drill a new borehole west of the cave to see how far it goes!! marty declares " let\'s do it!! - later the team meets with carmen as he examines the 2 artifacts found on lot 5 last week!! emma brings up an image of the first artifact and carmen says it is a heavy strap off of a chest or trunk and it was probably 12 in x 12 ins in size!! its probably from the 1600s - early 1700s& has no modern metals in it!! the second artifact, carmen says, is a crudely made nail so wouldnt have been used on anything fancy, and from the 1600s - to the 1+700s!! 	Forsyth S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COST January 3, 2024
is a crudely made nail so wouldnt have been used on anything fancy, and from the 1600s - to the 1+700s!! both artifacts are from the same period of the phips artifacts!! - back on lot 5 the water has been removed from the circular structure and the team is again digging inside the structure!! helen and moya find a strap off of a barrel and helen says it seems to be made of copper and iron!! jack reminds us that many barrel straps have been found on the island and some from as early as the 1400s!! the team is now wondering if lot 5 was a staging area for the building of the money pit!! 	Forsyth S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COST January 3, 2024
the team is now wondering if lot 5 was a staging area for the building of the money pit!! - the drill can again be heard in the money pit area where the team has begun the drilling of new borehole l- 13.5 just west of aladdins cave!! at 141ft down they hit 6ft of open space which they believe is aladdins cave and the bottom is made up of grit and soil!! steve inserts the water proof 120 high-definition camera into l-13.5 and they can make out a wall 30ft wide on which the edges are broken up!! just as the water turns murky steve sees what looks like an opening!! 	Forsyth S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COST January 3, 2024
just as the water turns murky steve sees what looks like an opening!! he puts the camera down another 6ins where they can clearly see an open space between 2 walls!! they decide to perform a sonar scan in a few days!! - the following morning while dumas is looking for voids in the garden shaft over on lot 5 while digging inside the circular structure jamie finds what looks like a stone wall that has collapsed in on itself!! they call laird to come take a look!! he arrives a short time later and reminds them that the magnetometer scan showed a 4ft wall and jamie thinks the wall looks to be larger than they previously thought!! 	Forsyth S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COST January 3, 2024
that the magnetometer scan showed a 4ft wall and jamie thinks the wall looks to be larger than they previously thought!! laird agrees that the wall has probably collapsed in on itself!! they will continue digging to open up the wall!! - as the episode ends the water keeps flowing into the garden shaft at one ft an hour!! where is it coming from?? paul from dumas is inside the shaft taking videos at the bottom where the water is flowing in!! at 65ft down he finds a cavity in a side wall that is completely dry and full of timbers!! 	Forsyth S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COST January 3, 2024
as a new morning arrives on oak island we find the dumas team fervently looking in the bottom of the garden shaft in order to find the spot where the water is entering the shaft!! at this point, the water is flowing in at 250 gallons a minute . in order to save this project the water entry has to be found now!! rick and marty arrive and along with paul from dumas, they work their way down the ladder to the bottom of the shaft so they can see firsthand the flow of their water!! paul points to the wall where they believe the water is coming in and informs rick and marty they will now be inserting the urethane sealant into every hole and crack in this wall in the hope of shutting off the water . 	Forsyth S11E9:  FILLING CAVITIES January 10, 2024
inserting the urethane sealant into every hole and crack in this wall in the hope of shutting off the water . going back up to 65 feet paul shows the brothers the cavity they found in a side wall last week!! upon inspecting it marty and rick agree that it is not old but probably constructed by former searchers!! rick can see the grotto goes back about 3 feet then upward!! he pulls out a piece of wood they will test for any sign of gold and do a c-14 test in order to determine age!! dumas gets back to work as the brothers leave!! 	Forsyth S11E9:  FILLING CAVITIES January 10, 2024
dumas gets back to work as the brothers leave!! - later that morning rick and marty meet with billy on the southside road at the swamp where they are getting ready to dig in order to see if the stone road continues to be ocean!! they want to know if this spot was an unloading area for supplies and more importantly treasure!! billy is anxious to get started so he has marty start the pump to drain the swamp in preparation!! - over on lot 5 the archaeologists are busy digging in the circular structure and jamie digs up what looks like a small finger ring!! 	Forsyth S11E9:  FILLING CAVITIES January 10, 2024
5 the archaeologists are busy digging in the circular structure and jamie digs up what looks like a small finger ring!! this is a surprise find!! she then digs up what looks like a decorative piece of metal that could be off of a door or chest!! feeling confident of more finds they continue their dig!! - the following morning in the money pit area the team is watching, via video, the dumas crew filling in the holes and cracks in the wall where the water is entering!! marty thinks it\'s like watching a surgeon perform surgery!! lets hope this surgery heals the water leak. 	Forsyth S11E9:  FILLING CAVITIES January 10, 2024
marty thinks it\'s like watching a surgeon perform surgery!! lets hope this surgery heals the water leak. - later morning find the team in the war room where they welcome author and freemason scott clarke back as he has new research material for them!! scott discovered, in the archives of canada a map drawn by surveyor general and freemason charles morris in 1762!! morris was responsible for dividing oak island into lots!! its long been wondered why morris only has oak island divided into lots& no others?? scott has found on this 1762 map ciphers in the form of a capital a with a v-shaped crossbar!! 	Forsyth S11E9:  FILLING CAVITIES January 10, 2024
scott has found on this 1762 map ciphers in the form of a capital a with a v-shaped crossbar!! there are several of these as and when connected they form a circle that runs right over top of oak island!! scott points out he has also found these as in portugal and italy and that this cipher is a symbol for the holy grail!! did charles morris believe the grail was on oak island when he drew up the map and is this why he divided oak island into lots?? although they didnt say they would lets hope the fellowship continues to work with scott to find the answers to these questions . 	Forsyth S11E9:  FILLING CAVITIES January 10, 2024
didnt say they would lets hope the fellowship continues to work with scott to find the answers to these questions . - the next day finds the team back on the south-shore road in the hope of finding that stone road continues on to the shore!! the swamp has been drained and billy is digging along with gary detecting!! gary sees and pulls up a foot-long tube-shaped piece of wood that the team believes could be a dowel like the ones found previously at smiths cove!! it will be washed and tested!! - while paul and his dumas team continue working on getting the water flow stopped in the garden shaft on lot 5 the archaeology team has just finished constructing an outline of the larger structure under the circular structure with tape!! 	Forsyth S11E9:  FILLING CAVITIES January 10, 2024
lot 5 the archaeology team has just finished constructing an outline of the larger structure under the circular structure with tape!! they have used the dimensions from the magnometer scan results making this bottom structure 30 feet by 45 feet!! its much larger than the team expected!! they will keep digging to the bottom in hopes of finding out what the structure is and when it was built!! jamie then finds a small 1-inch square-shaped stone with lines carved on both sides!! fiona points out that they have never found anything like this before and jamie asks why stone and what was it used for?? 	Forsyth S11E9:  FILLING CAVITIES January 10, 2024
out that they have never found anything like this before and jamie asks why stone and what was it used for?? rick arrives and he agrees this artifact needs to be researched!! jamie informs rick that she believes that this structure was deliberately buried before the money pit was constructed!! why?? lets hope continued digging and research will provide us the answers . - this episode ends in the swamp where billy continues to dig and garys beeper goes off!! he pulls up a large piece of metal chain that looks to be old and hand forged made before the 1840s!! 	Forsyth S11E9:  FILLING CAVITIES January 10, 2024
he pulls up a large piece of metal chain that looks to be old and hand forged made before the 1840s!! a few feet away gary finds a large metal hook  that could have been used along with the chain to load and unload cargo on this spot!! steve arrives and measures the depth of the area they have opened up and finds they are now at the same level of the stone road and here it begins to slant towards the ocean!! was there a wharf here?? was treasure unloaded here?? join us next week fellow questers and in the meantime stay safe please 	Forsyth S11E9:  FILLING CAVITIES January 10, 2024
in last nights episode, on target, we begin at the southeast corner of the swamp, where dr. ian spooner, rick lagina and jack begley are inspecting the newly found boulder that resembles the stones of nolans cross. dr. spooner remarks that the smaller stones around the boulder seem to be very suspicious because of the angularity of the rocks. he states that these stones look to have been deposited by humans and not a natural formation. he believes that they are not from the shore, but from a deeper excavation, possibly from the money pit. he suggests they continue working in the area focusing on the stone road and ramp area and also look very closely at the shoreline to provide more clues. 	Spino and Wheatley - S11E15: ON TARGET ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 21, 2024
area focusing on the stone road and ramp area and also look very closely at the shoreline to provide more clues. we are then taken to halifax where doug crowell and scott barlow visit joe landry at the nova scotia college of art and designs printshop and bindery, also known as dawson printshop. they bring the leather boot/shoe that was recently found at the southeast corner of the swamp by the stone road feature. joe inspects the piece and mentions that its hand stitched and appears to be a gentlemans boot. he says that the leather is vegetable tanned, which is the earliest tannage. 	Spino and Wheatley - S11E15: ON TARGET ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 21, 2024
he says that the leather is vegetable tanned, which is the earliest tannage. he believes the artifact is from the late 1600s to early 1700s. he believes it may have been an officers boot and mentioned it looked like french work. it was then brought up that several countries are suspected of being involved with oak island, and joe stated it could have been european from several sources. keep in mind that the area that includes oak island was controlled by the french in the late 1600s through early 1700s time period. the scene shifts to the war room where oak island researcher and author, christopher morford visits the oak island team to discuss his research regarding nolans cross and the menorah. 	Spino and Wheatley - S11E15: ON TARGET ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 21, 2024
island researcher and author, christopher morford visits the oak island team to discuss his research regarding nolans cross and the menorah. christopher explains that he believes that the nolans cross alignment was created by the knights templars that indicates where the menorah was placed on oak island, specifically the garden shaft area. he believes that nolans cross is aligned with jerusalem and that oak island represented new jerusalem. chris explains that he believes the knights templar, or their descendants mapped this area using cone c, cone a and two drilled stones that lead to the garden shaft. this is where he believes the menorah was kept. 	Spino and Wheatley - S11E15: ON TARGET ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 21, 2024
this is where he believes the menorah was kept. the team decides to check the measurements that christopher suggests in more detail. we then move to the shoreline on tom nolans property at cone c of nolans cross. surveyor steve guptill, tom nolan and rick lagina begin their tracking and measurements based on christopher morfords presentation. they begin at cone c and walk the nolan property over the first drilled stone. they take measurements and proceed across the property to cone a. again, they record the data and move on to the second drilled stone. steve mentions that at this point they are halfway between cone c and the garden shaft area. 	Spino and Wheatley - S11E15: ON TARGET ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 21, 2024
steve mentions that at this point they are halfway between cone c and the garden shaft area. the team then traverses the rest of the way to their end target. they measure the end point near the garden shaft. while the end point doesnt hit the garden shaft directly, it does hit the proposed tunnel that runs beneath the area. the team remarks that the measurement is pretty darn close to the shaft. our analysis concludes at the swamp where metal detectorist, gary drayton and jack begley are working through the spoils when they discover a very large tree stump. jack remarks that its interesting to find these trees have grown in the swamp which suggests the swamp wasnt always there. 	Spino and Wheatley - S11E15: ON TARGET ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 21, 2024
jack remarks that its interesting to find these trees have grown in the swamp which suggests the swamp wasnt always there. a little later, rick joins them as they move towards the middle of the area because a recent storm caused flooding. at this location, more tree stumps are found. in inspecting the stumps, its noted they look axe cut and theres speculation that it was for the construction of the money pit. keep in mind that oak island has a history of being used for logging so finding cut trees also fits into the established history of the island. at the end of the episode at the garden shaft, its mentioned that the wood at the bottom seems to be made from round timbers, which suggests an older construction. 	Spino and Wheatley - S11E15: ON TARGET ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 21, 2024
in last nights episode, dark and stormy, we begin at the swamp, where oak island team members geoscientist, dr. ian spooner, jack begley, craig tester, along with rick and alex lagina are analyzing the area in the middle of the swamp where the recent tree stumps were found. dr. spooner mentions that there appears to be a higher and lower layer of these stumps that were axe cut. he mentions that if the stumps date to the 1200s they could be tied to the stone road feature. he goes on to say that they need the conditions to be drier in order to resume work in the area. 	Spino and Wheatley - S11E16: DARK AND STORMY ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Mar 29, 2024
the compendium has sought to discover the possible identity of the old irish school master, who was referred to as the one who worked out the 90ft stone cipher. that exact description was used in both stories provided by reverend a.t. kempton and edward rowe snow. although, when reverend kempton wrote to frederick blair he called the person, a very bright irish teacher. the compendium has identified a prime suspect. professors lietchi and demille had a colleague at dalhousie college who fit this description. professor john johnson came to dalhousie college in 1863, at the age of 28 years old, having an ma from trinity college in dublin. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART FOUR Mar 5, 2024
came to dalhousie college in 1863, at the age of 28 years old, having an ma from trinity college in dublin. he was the professor of classics from 1863 to 1894. professor johnson was described as, he had wit and charm, but he was less forthright; his shafts were more delicate, the way he was, crafted more gentlyhis manner was at once cool and precisejohnsons classes could never be taken for granted, nor his examinations, for he was a close marker. you could not work off some glittering generality on him. if your answers were not to the point you might just as well forget it. we noticed the characters in the 90ft stone cipher appear to be a mixture of ancient greek and mathematical symbols. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART FOUR Mar 5, 2024
it. we noticed the characters in the 90ft stone cipher appear to be a mixture of ancient greek and mathematical symbols. professors johnson, demille, and lietchi had the perfect background, education and opportunity to be involved with the 90 ft. stone cipher. it should be noted that notebooks of professor lietchi and his daughters were found in the nova scotia archives by doug crowell that had the exact same symbols that were used in the 90ft. stone cipher. but how did the cipher go from being lost to being found again? please visit www.theoakislandcompendium.com for the rest of the article and parts one, two, and three of this series. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART FOUR Mar 5, 2024
in this new series, compendium investigations will be looking closely at various documents which have been associated with oak island, whether directly or indirectly. allegedly, these all belonged at some time to dr william bill jackson. this vast collection of documents included the jackson oak island map and the la formule and cremona documents, all of which have been mentioned on the curse of oak island tv show. we mostly learn about bill jackson and his documents in two books: the templar mission by zena halpern and the scrolls of onteora by don ruh. the cremona document the composition of the cremona document is confusing to understand, it has been given different names (benvenuto document, the onteora document) and seems to contain various manuscripts with texts and maps. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
it has been given different names (benvenuto document, the onteora document) and seems to contain various manuscripts with texts and maps. it was supposedly written by different authors and there different parts, including a journal written by a certain ralph de sudley in the 12th century. there are various subjects in the document but the most extra-ordinary involves a trans-atlantic trip undertaken by a group of knights of the order of the temple. it has been suggested that the document is a copy of the original, which explains part of the more modern-looking handwriting. it was partly written in the theban alphabet, and uses various languages, including english, italian and french. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
it was partly written in the theban alphabet, and uses various languages, including english, italian and french. the cremona has never been published in its entirety, we have only seen extracts from the internet, and in zena halperns and don ruhs books, so unfortunately, we cant analyse the full document properly. in part 1 of this investigation, we will examine the "nova-scotia map" and a page that don ruh calls the "ark page. the so called "nova-scotia map", was shown on the curse of oak island tv show and featured in both zena halpern\'s and don ruh\'s books. it is suggested that this document dates from the 12th century. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
it is suggested that this document dates from the 12th century. though the map is not to scale, we can easily identify different parts of canada including nova-scotia. the annotations on the map are in french and there are numbers written in roman numerals and in text form. there are certain words/sentences that seemed slightly peculiar to us, but two annotations in particular caught our attention:  the sentence "la courant de monstre" ["the monster current"] is badly written and should have the masculine article "le" as "courant" is a masculine noun. we know from various sources that parts of the cremona could have been written by an english speaker but masculine/feminine is a common mistake throughout the bill jackson documents, some of which were supposedly written by a french speaker. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
but masculine/feminine is a common mistake throughout the bill jackson documents, some of which were supposedly written by a french speaker.  we think the word "inuhit" has an error and should be written "inuit" like in english. there are no other similar words it could represent. "inuit" is a very modern word; it is attested as being introduced to the french language in the 20th century. in the huge database of archives on the bnf website (french national library) the first publication we\'ve found with the word "inuit" was published in 1963. it could have been used earlier, but not in the 12th century. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
it could have been used earlier, but not in the 12th century. it\'s first known use in the english language was about 1745. the ark document in don ruhs book, there is a photo of a page from bill jacksons collection that has the drawing of a chest on it, this is supposedly a representation of the ark of the covenant. the rest of the document appears to be a sort of map, there are also lines which look like the shape of a river and various annotations in the theban alphabet. the theban alphabet (also known as the witches alphabet and the runes of honorius) was supposedly created by honorius of thebes in the middle ages, this is first claimed in polygraphia by johannes trithemius, polygraph, abbot and cryptographer, in 1518. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
of thebes in the middle ages, this is first claimed in polygraphia by johannes trithemius, polygraph, abbot and cryptographer, in 1518. but earlier writings in theban have yet to be found and authenticated. it is used as a replacement cipher for concealing secret messages, spells, and knowledge. it is often associated with witchcraft and the wiccan and pagan movements; it was used to write rituals and magic. in the ark document, theban was used to replace french words. it has been suggested that the order of the temple used theban symbols as a substitution alphabet but after extensive research we have found nothing to conclude this is the case. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
used theban symbols as a substitution alphabet but after extensive research we have found nothing to conclude this is the case. at the time of the templars, substitution alphabets were indeed used, there are a few known examples of the cistercian numerals, which the religious group created as an alternative to arabic numerals. the cistercians were closely affiliated to the temple order, and it would not be surprising if the templars used a similar system, but there is no actual evidence to support that the knights templar used such a cipher. some researchers have suggested that the cremona is a medieval document, even possibly a templar document, which was partly re-copied much later, this is purportedly the case with the ark document. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
document, even possibly a templar document, which was partly re-copied much later, this is purportedly the case with the ark document. to comprehend more about this document, its writer, and its possible age we have examined it in detail. in don ruhs book the words have already been transcribed into french and then translated into english, we have rechecked the theban transcription that was done at the time and have looked at the sentences and words. the letters in plain alphabet (a,b,c) were added as an index for the annotations by researchers in the 1970s. we have put the annotations that we find the most revealing with their corresponding letters below. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
we have put the annotations that we find the most revealing with their corresponding letters below.  a. karnak: the temple complex in egypt. the earliest entry that we find of this name being used in french is in a 1786 book. there is an earlier usage in 1668 but this is spelt carnac like the megalithic monument in france (3 and 4).  b. le souteraie, which had been translated here as tunnel, actually means underground. composed of the words sous and terrain, in early french it is written with s or z in front of the t. it appears without the middle s in the 3rd edition of the french academy dictionary in 1740 (5), though we have seen some earlier uses in publications from the 1560s (6). 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
of the french academy dictionary in 1740 (5), though we have seen some earlier uses in publications from the 1560s (6).  c. loqsor = louxor in egypt, was indeed sometimes written that way in the 19th century.  d. le corridor de leau: translated here as the water pipe, it actually means the corridor of water. we find corridor first attested in use in the 17th century (7 and . though it might have been used earlier it is doubtful to have been used before the 16th century.  e. le compartments: meaning the compartments. the grammar is incorrect, it has a singular article for a plural noun. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
 e. le compartments: meaning the compartments. the grammar is incorrect, it has a singular article for a plural noun. it should also be spelt compartiments.  h. la bagoutte de zinc: supposedly meaning the zinc rod. it should be spelt baguette. more interestingly, the word zinc was attested as being written zain until the mid-17th century, when it first appears in various publications (9). it is not until the 4th edition of the academy dictionary in 1762 that it is officially spelt zinc (10)  i. le couivre bagette: translating as the copper rod. this is not correct and should be written la baguette de cuivre. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
le couivre bagette: translating as the copper rod. this is not correct and should be written la baguette de cuivre. both the spelling and sentence construction are wrong.  j. la vitrine dor, which is translated in the book as cabinet or chest of gold, is certainly more a cabinet than a chest. the word is attested in use in the early 19th century but only first appears in the french academy dictionary in its 7th edition in 1878 (11).  l. la aile des aigles: meaning the wings of the eagles, the article la should be l as the following word starts with a vowel. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
aigles: meaning the wings of the eagles, the article la should be l as the following word starts with a vowel. this is a common mistake on many bill jackson documents. the french, which was encrypted into theban at some point, has many spelling mistakes and grammar problems. it\'s highly unlikely that the writer was a native speaker. we understand from the researchers who have studied these documents, that they are likely to be copies and that the original writers might not have been french. we take their arguments into account, but these mistakes remind us of the other bill jackson documents supposedly produced by other writers on other dates, where there are many similar issues (plurals, articles, masculine/feminine). 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
other bill jackson documents supposedly produced by other writers on other dates, where there are many similar issues (plurals, articles, masculine/feminine). this document has many common points with the oak island map and with the abraham letter, which were both supposedly produced at different times and by different people. this would indicate the likelihood that the documents had the same author or authors. conclusion: concerning the date of the french words, in both the nova scotia map and the ark page, it is possible that some were used before they were officially recorded. this could imply they were used a few decades before they were attested, but not centuries. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
this could imply they were used a few decades before they were attested, but not centuries. in both documents there are many words which only appear in the 17th century, vitrine is first recorded in 1878 and inouit only first appeared in the 9th edition of the french academy dictionary which is actually the current version! its hard to understand when this document was written and by whom. if it is genuine, how many times has it been copied? and why hasnt it been copied in its original form? clearly the french language and the style used is not medieval. due to all the irregularities of these two documents, it is the compendiums opinion that they were both made in the 20th century and were not written by a native french speaker. 	Spino and Wheatley Bill Jackson Documents Investigation - Part 1 Dec 12, 2023
in part 1 of this investigation, we presented the mysterious bill jackson and what little is known about his alleged life. we also examined a page from the cremona document; with writing in theban letters that was used as substitution for french. we concluded that some of the french words were modern and in all likelihood the french had not been written before the 20th century. in this 2nd part we will present what is known about the alleged provenance of the cremona document, well also look at other parts of the document and present some intriguing finds. provenance it is from zena halperns and don ruhs accounts that we learn how the cremona document came into bill jacksons hands. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents Investigation Part 2" Dec 19, 2023
it is from zena halperns and don ruhs accounts that we learn how the cremona document came into bill jacksons hands. it was supposedly on a trip to france with dan spartan that bill jackson learned of the existence of a document from cremona in italy. in the early 1970s, jackson apparently visited a rare-book dealer in paris. it is here that he bought a pamphlet which eventually led him to the cremona document. both don ruh and zena halpern published a letter from a mr. alex caron which relates how bill jackson allegedly found and bought the document. from the letter we learn that the bookdealer was named pierre de valzac, he lived at 15 rue des fontaines in paris, we have researched this address thinking that such a banal street ("fontaine street") would believably exist in paris, compendium investigations determined that it doesnt. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents Investigation Part 2" Dec 19, 2023
this address thinking that such a banal street ("fontaine street") would believably exist in paris, compendium investigations determined that it doesnt. there are other variants of the name: rue jean de la fontaine, rue de la fontaine du roi, rue de la fontaine mulart, rue des fontaines du temple  but we have not found the one were looking for. maybe the street names have changed since the 1970s? we continued by searching for this monsieur de valzac, knowing the date they visited him, it was possible that de valzac was no longer alive, but there should still be records of his life and maybe descendants to contact. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents Investigation Part 2" Dec 19, 2023
that de valzac was no longer alive, but there should still be records of his life and maybe descendants to contact. we were greatly surprised to find no record whatsoever of any person named de valzac in france. the only thing we found with this name was a brand of wine and a brief mention of a man in an english book from 1828. there are no results for any person with that surname on specialised sites like geneanet, familysearch or ancestry. strange to say the least please visit www.theoakislandcompendium.com for the rest of the article. this is only excerpt of the entire article which has more details and information. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents Investigation Part 2" Dec 19, 2023
the discovery of the "la formule" document began in the effects that allegedly bill jackson left don ruh, which included a book written by emmanuel anati called palestine before the hebrews. it was at zena halperns house and on a trip to see her, ruh decided to look at it. they discovered that two pages were glued together like a sort of pocket, and inside they found la formule and the oak island map. the fact that two sheets of paper were folded and concealed between two pages makes us wonder what the point of this was, if it was for concealment, how discreet could this actually have been? 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
makes us wonder what the point of this was, if it was for concealment, how discreet could this actually have been? its an amazing coincidence that the documents were hidden in a book that involved hebrews and palestine, considering that zena halpern was an expert in early hebrew language and had a great interest in this subject. it would seem to be a book that zena would enjoy looking through and would have probably known emmanuel anati by name. zena halpern never met the mercurial bill jackson. the "la formule" document is in two parts, the top part of the document is a text written with symbols, on examination they clearly resemble the symbols from the alleged 90-ft stone. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
of the document is a text written with symbols, on examination they clearly resemble the symbols from the alleged 90-ft stone. the title above the encoded message is in clear text and reads la formule\'\' which is the french word for "formula". the bottom line also appears to be in french and reads ving la valeur, we believe there is a t missing at the end of the first word (vingt) where the document was cut. this whole line probably means twenty the value. the code of la formule consists of french words so it stands to reason that the series of symbols should be deciphered in french. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
la formule consists of french words so it stands to reason that the series of symbols should be deciphered in french. here a few elements we would like to point out: avec a angle: in this construction there are two prepositions next to each other avec and a. this is not grammatically correct. this sentence would translate as with at angle. hampe : it has been suggested that this word might mean shaft. this is correct but not like the shaft in a construction, it actually means the shaft of a broom, or a spear. it can also mean a branch without leaves. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
it can also mean a branch without leaves. to us, this suggests that this document was made with the use of an english/french dictionary and that the writer wanted to translate shaft into french but chose the wrong translation. the use of the article un in front of mille is uncommon for a french speaker. we find this same mistake in many of purported bill jacksons documents. as with the other jackson documents we have analysed, we showed this to our french language specialists, and both have confirmed that there are various constructions that seem unnatural and do not make sense. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
our french language specialists, and both have confirmed that there are various constructions that seem unnatural and do not make sense. they agree with our conclusion that this was not written by a french speaker. it seems that this document was originally in english and translated with a dictionary, but what would be the point in doing this? why would a person unfamiliar with french try to encode french instructions, why wouldn\'t they simply choose their mother-tongue? was a french theme necessary for some reason? another interesting point to mention is that the text is written inside a shape which we imagine represents the original document. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
another interesting point to mention is that the text is written inside a shape which we imagine represents the original document. the outline of the shape and the coded text were rewritten in what looks like ballpoint-pen and later photocopied. one of the symbols overlaps the shape which doesn\'t really make sense. if the symbol was originally within the border of the shape, it would not be overlapped on a photocopy of the document. to our surprise in the scrolls of onteora we learn about two other documents with the same shape as the la formule. according to don ruh, one of these was found by bill jackson while recovering stolen documents for the federal authorities. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
according to don ruh, one of these was found by bill jackson while recovering stolen documents for the federal authorities. the other labelled as "fig 240" in don ruh\'s book, is a piece of a larger document supposedly representing "possible tunnels under oak island". we layered these documents together and they revealed the same shape. "fig 240" is part of a series of 7 oddly shaped documents that fit together like a puzzle. in ruhs book he calls it part one of seven. this is an important piece of information to remember and clearly represents some suspicious coincidences. it should also be noted that puzzle pieces like this were not invented until around 1760 by london cartographer, john spilsbury, who glued a map on a piece of wood and cut out the countries. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
around 1760 by london cartographer, john spilsbury, who glued a map on a piece of wood and cut out the countries. the mcinnis connection: according to the signature at the bottom of the document, it was given to w. david jackson by tim (jim) mcinnis. don ruh states this in his book. we know that after jims death the mcginnis family found a copy of the "la formule" in his belongings, which consisted of three boxes of assorted oak island newspaper clippings, theories, other docs, and misc. items. allegedly, the "la formule" document was hidden in a wall of the mcginnis home on oak island as told by his immediate family members. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
formule" document was hidden in a wall of the mcginnis home on oak island as told by his immediate family members. other family members disagree. james jim mcinnis was very preoccupied with the oak island treasure hunt, knowing his family connection to the island this is not surprising; he is a descendant of daniel mcginnis that allegedly discovered the money pit. we had the chance to read oak island connection, a book written by jean, joan, joyce mcginnis and kerrin margiano, who are all related to jim mcginnis. in the book it\'s conveyed that jim mcginnis did indeed have a copy of the "la formule" and that there was already a paragraph in french at the bottom when it was rediscovered after his death. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
"la formule" and that there was already a paragraph in french at the bottom when it was rediscovered after his death. why would there be a eulogy for mr. hayward written on this document? it should be noted that jim was a merchant sailor at one point according to a mcginnis family member. jim mcginnis was allegedly an undercover agent for the cia as reported by his immediate family (which reminds us of the supposed work bill jackson did with the spartan agency). we can confirm that jim mcginnis was in the us army from 1968-1971, but we cannot confirm that he ever was a green beret or worked in intelligence before or after the vietnam war as claimed in the book and by some of his family members. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
worked in intelligence before or after the vietnam war as claimed in the book and by some of his family members. jim allegedly worked and lived in the new york area at one time, which is also where bill jackson allegedly lived at some point. don ruh is also local to this area, did he or bill jackson meet with jim mcginnis to obtain the "la formule"? why would jim mcginnis give it to somebody else? or did someone else provide this document to jim mcginnis? on the bottom of the "la formule" there is a note that jim mcginnis addresses bill jackson as w. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
on the bottom of the "la formule" there is a note that jim mcginnis addresses bill jackson as w. david jackson. we have not seen any other documents in which bill jackson is addressed with his middle name in full. does this suggest they were close? how many letters do you receive with your first name initialed and your middle name in full? here jim writes his name mcinnis while on two of the letters he wrote, which are included in the oak island connection book, jim signs his letters as mcginnis. did he change the spelling of his name or was this written by somebody else? 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
did he change the spelling of his name or was this written by somebody else? why would he identify himself as tim? to the compendium\'s knowledge, the mcginnis copy of la formule does not have the note of transfer between mcinnis and jackson, which suggests that the note was made later by someone else. the 90 ft stone connection: it appears that some of the same symbols were used in both the alleged 90-foot stone cipher and la formule. according to eyewitness reports, the 90 ft stone existed and had strange markings/carvings on it. the cipher was not publicly known until 1948 when it appeared in edward rowe snow\'s mysteries and adventures along the atlantic coast. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
cipher was not publicly known until 1948 when it appeared in edward rowe snow\'s mysteries and adventures along the atlantic coast. this cipher was attributed to reverend a.t. kempton who reported that he received it in 1909 from a retired teacher in mahone bay, nova scotia, for a book kempton was planning on writing. the teacher is suspected of having been james lietchi, who was a professor at dalhousie university in halifax from 1865 to 1906. lietchi was retired and living in lunenburg, nova scotia, in 1909. compendium investigations has completed an investigation into the 90ft stone cipher and will publish this series immediately after our current investigation. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
compendium investigations has completed an investigation into the 90ft stone cipher and will publish this series immediately after our current investigation. in next weeks final part of our investigation, the compendium will look at the "oak island map" which has been branded as the "zena map". we will share with you our analysis by presenting parts of an article we wrote together in 2021. we will also examine the senseless controversy that has come-out since zena halpern first showed the map on the curse of oak island tv show in 2016. please visit www.theoakislandcompendium.com for the complete article and analysis. what is presented here is only a portion of the overall report. 	Spino and Wheatley "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" INVESTIGATION - PART 3  LA FORMULE Dec 26, 2023
in part 4, well examine the "oak island map" which changed the entire landscape of the oak island mystery. is it warranted to have had such an impact? the map was presented by zena halpern on the curse of oak island and is known as the zena map. when it was first shown charlotte noticed many grammatical problems, wrong articles, wrong prepositions, and usage of an adjective instead of an adverb. these mistakes made her think it wasnt written by a french person. masculine and feminine would not be mixed up by a native french speaker even in old-french. there are many problems with the map having originated in medieval times. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
there are many problems with the map having originated in medieval times. here are charlottes findings: cette dessin: cette is used for feminine nouns and in this case dessin is masculine. la trou: la meaning the is used for feminine nouns, but the word trou is masculine. le barque: le meaning the is used for masculine nouns, whereas here barque is feminine. les sud indiens travail trs bon: this has many mistakes. the article is in plural form, but the adjective, noun and verb are all in singular form. the word bon is an adjective but should be an adverb. the sentence should read les suds indiens travaillent trs bien. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
the sentence should read les suds indiens travaillent trs bien. also, the word indian was not used until the late 15th century. interestingly we see the same type of mistake on the nova scotia map, with "inuit" (19th century), although the map is suggested as being medieval. chene: meaning oak did not exist in 1347. in fact, it was written "chaisne" at that time and evolved to "chesne" before becoming "chne", the latter was first recorded in the renowned french academy dictionary in 1740. atterrissage: which translates as landing place was not in use in the medieval period and first appears in the french academy dictionary in 1830, 500 years after the map was allegedly made. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
the medieval period and first appears in the french academy dictionary in 1830, 500 years after the map was allegedly made. we also concluded that 1347 could not possibly be the date that the map was made because the date would not have been written that way. some have suggested that the date could be a measurement, but we would think it would have been labeled as such, instead of being identified as a landing place which would denote a specific time of landing. there have been claims that the map is a copy of the original. usually when you make a copy you dont modify words and geography without copying and presenting the original format. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
usually when you make a copy you dont modify words and geography without copying and presenting the original format. concerning the grammar mistakes, any person with the capability of writing in 1347 would have had sufficient knowledge to get the gender of articles correct, but it cant be both. is it an old document with blatant unnatural grammar mistakes or a recent copy with limited french vocabulary? weve heard numerous arguments about why this map is genuine, the most common being that the annotations on the map correspond to features on oak island. the details indicate this map was drawn by someone who knew the island very well. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
the details indicate this map was drawn by someone who knew the island very well. for example, someone like jim mcginnis who had 3 boxes of documents and clippings of information and a family history involving the island. he wrote letters asking for various maps and requesting information concerning the history of the island which has been discovered by the compendium. his name was written on the la formule document, which was found along with the "oak island map", which he had his own copy. a translated version of the oak island map was sent to us by a person who wishes to remain anonymous. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
a translated version of the oak island map was sent to us by a person who wishes to remain anonymous. it appears to be a translation of the oak island map by bill jackson. it has many striking similarities with another version that was created by don ruh in his book. they arent identical, but they have subtle differences. we are certain that the version in ruhs book and this version sent to us were made by the same writer due to the particularity in the writing and drawing on both maps. this leaves us wondering how this can be possible. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
this leaves us wondering how this can be possible. we cannot publish don ruhs version for copyright reasons, but you can find it on (page 316) of the scrolls of onteora. another translated version was shown to the oak island team when zena halpern presented the map in 2016. what is extremely odd about this version is that it doesnt match the translation provided by zena in her book, which is more accurate. it has been poorly translated, and the initial french seems to have been badly understood, for example in the top left we can see the english word angel; the person/people who translated this probably thought the original french annotation was ange, but it is in fact anse which means cove or bay, which makes much more sense. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
original french annotation was ange, but it is in fact anse which means cove or bay, which makes much more sense. another interesting detail is the translated sentence do you go here with the boat when in fact in french it clearly says, do not go here with the boat. this previous translation brings up some of the geographical issues with the map. in 1347, when the map was presumably made, oak island was not an island and was still connected to the mainland according to geologists. the shape of the island wouldve been different than depicted on the oak island map. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
the shape of the island wouldve been different than depicted on the oak island map. the sea level was lower so apple island would have been larger than today and that is not reflected on the map. also, when navigating around oak island, one must be mindful of the frog island shoal. it is obscured by water but shallow and can hang up a larger watercraft. so, the warning, do not go here with the boat applies to today. the problem with the map is that at the time of creation, the frog island shoal was visible land. this is not shown on the map, and it would have been if it was accurate for 1347. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
this is not shown on the map, and it would have been if it was accurate for 1347. this also points to the map being a modern forgery. in the scrolls of onteora, don ruh states that during a trip to france (p49) bill jackson acquired the map from a member of the rochfoucauld-doudeauville family. in december 2018 after his book was released ruh stated in scott wolters blog, that the map did not belong to zena, it was his property, and she used it without his permission. he described a completely different story regarding the maps provenance. ruh claimed the map was fake and produced a letter allegedly written to him by bill jackson. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
ruh claimed the map was fake and produced a letter allegedly written to him by bill jackson. ruh states that he didnt remember the letter when he found the map with zena and didnt remember it again when he was writing his book. within a few months of allegedly finding this 1979 letter ruh remembers the map was a forgery. don ruhs statement: what the public needs to know that ms. halpern never knew, was the oak island map which came into my possession in 2015 was never in any way connected to the cremona document material or the medieval knights templar. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
into my possession in 2015 was never in any way connected to the cremona document material or the medieval knights templar. the oak island map is a fabrication, most likely created by bill jackson as part of an assignment by the agency dr. jackson worked for to intentionally set up a bad guy associated with the p2 scandal in the late 1970s. shortly after i discovered the oak island map hidden within the pages of a book by bill in 2015, i showed the map to ms. halpern who immediately assumed it was connected to the cremona document story. at the time, even i was unclear of the maps association to anything until i recently found the letter below in my voluminous records that put the oak island map into proper context. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
anything until i recently found the letter below in my voluminous records that put the oak island map into proper context. my only involvement in the operation was to carve the symbols on a swagger stick as directed by bill jackson. the redacted portions in the letter are to protect persons involved in the p2 matter that are still living. which is true regarding ruhs story, was the map given to jackson by rochefoucauld or did bill jackson create the map? with all the details that ruh seems to remember, its surprising that he forgot about the map being fake. especially when ruhs been described as having a photographic memory. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
especially when ruhs been described as having a photographic memory. even more surprising is that he made up jacksons meeting with a rochefoucauld out of thin air. this suggests deception and confirms our findings that the oak island map is a forgery. what does this say about the other documents associated with it? the compendium concludes that all three jackson documents are modern forgeries created by the same person or group of people. please visit www.theoakislandcompendium.com for the entire article as this is only an excerpt. you dont want to miss the entire report. the compendium would like to thank erin king for her contributions to part 4. 	Spino and Wheatly "BILL JACKSON DOCUMENTS" - PART 4  THE OAK ISLAND MAP Jan 12, 2024
in, an ancient semitic goddess leaves her mark in new york (2014). zena halpern states, in 2000, a new yorker was hiking through (the) catskill mountains when he spotted a peculiar carving on a heap of stones off a trail near the neversink river. four years later, don ruh led me back to the scene of his discovery, where he found the engraved stone face-down on top of the small rock pilethe first impression suggested the crude representation of a menorah...two other stones inscribed with ancient hebrew script have been recovered in the vicinity. one was found resting at the base of a tree. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents - Part 5- The Origins and Players" Jan 23, 2024
one was found resting at the base of a tree. it featured a two-inch cutout that another cut stone fit with exact precision glenn kreisberg in spirts in stone, the secrets of megalithic america, writes: halpern took photos of the stone with her to israel,an expert in ancient script at haifa university, said the letters were phoenicianhalpern shared (this) with her neara friendsdecided to go back and look around zena, along with don ruh, were exploringand we saw a small stone resting on a rock at the roots of a tree, which had a cut-out notch and a small, perfectly cut stone that fit within this notch. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents - Part 5- The Origins and Players" Jan 23, 2024
the roots of a tree, which had a cut-out notch and a small, perfectly cut stone that fit within this notch. there was a space beneath the rockruhreached his hand beneath the rock, felt around, grabbed a hard object, and began to pull it out. as he pulled it out(we) could see two letters as the stone emerged...halpern said they looked like phoenician letters. it appears that the fortuitous discovery of these stones brought zena halpern into collaboration with don ruh. the french connection - evidence suggests that the la formule document and the oak island map are connected in some way. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents - Part 5- The Origins and Players" Jan 23, 2024
the french connection - evidence suggests that the la formule document and the oak island map are connected in some way. both are in french and the author who wrote them seems to have a minimum knowledge of the french language. the author was clearly not native french but knew some of the basic sentence constructions. charlotte teaches french to british and american expats living in france. some of her students have lived in france for many years but they still make the same mistakes, some of which resemble the ones seen in don ruhs documents. in the compendiums opinion it appears that the person writing these documents is a native english speaker who has at least some minimal usage of the french language. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents - Part 5- The Origins and Players" Jan 23, 2024
the person writing these documents is a native english speaker who has at least some minimal usage of the french language. don ruh - in the scrolls of onteora, don ruh reveals part of his life story and mentions his family. to understand more about don ruhs past we decided to do a full background search about him and his origins. he was born in december 1942 in new york state, to albert ruh and beatrice blandenier. albert ruh was born in the french speaking part of switzerland. beatrice blandenier, ruhs mother, was born in new york, but her parents also came from switzerland. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents - Part 5- The Origins and Players" Jan 23, 2024
beatrice blandenier, ruhs mother, was born in new york, but her parents also came from switzerland. in fact, in the 1930 united states census, it clearly says that don ruhs maternal grandparents spoke french. research reveals albert ruh and his family came from switzerland, and some originating from la chaux-des-fonds which is 20km from the city of neuchatel and only a few km from the french border. the name of this town immediately rang a bell for the compendium. the scrolls of onteora provides a photo of a 1657 letter that don ruh allegedly received from the spartan agency. the letter had supposedly been photographed at bill jackson\'s request. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents - Part 5- The Origins and Players" Jan 23, 2024
the letter had supposedly been photographed at bill jackson\'s request. its not a normal letter, as its supposedly written with some sort of invisible ink that needed heat to appear. the letter was allegedly written by abraham robert who was state counsellor and the first ever mayor of la chaux des fonds, the same town don ruhs family came from and his maternal family only 20 km away. another interesting connection is albert ruhs world war ii draft card. it lists his employer as the swiss bank corp. in 1939, swiss bank corp opened an office in new york. the office was intended to store assets in case of a german invasion. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents - Part 5- The Origins and Players" Jan 23, 2024
the office was intended to store assets in case of a german invasion. after the war, it was shown that they likely participated in trading stolen gold, and securities during the war. ironically, the bill jacksons story alludes to a banking scandal involving the banco ambrosiano (2nd largest bank in italy), roberto calvi and his death, the p2 organization, and the vatican in the early 1980s. these real-life events seem to be areas that don ruh would have a great interest in due to his fathers background. diana muir - muir is one of the few people mentioned in the acknowledgment page of the scrolls of onteora, citing her assistance to don ruh with his book. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents - Part 5- The Origins and Players" Jan 23, 2024
few people mentioned in the acknowledgment page of the scrolls of onteora, citing her assistance to don ruh with his book. previously, muir claimed she was given a saddle bag of documents in 2005 which laid in the back of her closet for 9 years. in 2014, she allegedly translated them from latin, olde and middle english so she could publish them in the book, the lost templar journals of prince henry sinclair. muir states that she became worried about being accused of forgery and eliminated the original documents. the compendium found a june 2023 genealogy blog article that uncovered some very concerning information about muir. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents - Part 5- The Origins and Players" Jan 23, 2024
the compendium found a june 2023 genealogy blog article that uncovered some very concerning information about muir. in a 1983 newspaper article, it details how diana hanson (muirs married name) was investigated by the fbi concerning a case of fraudulent mormon documents that she intended to sell to brigham young university. she claimed she had a collection of letters from brigham young and joseph smith jr., diaries of smiths widow, photos of smith, and other historical mormon material. she was not prosecuted, and the university declined to press charges. muir was given a misdemeanor and admitted it was a hoax claiming, i made up this list from my own imaginationim sorry this happened, i got caught up in a story which i was unable to stop. diana muir assisted don ruh with the scrolls of onteora, and they continue to collaborate. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents - Part 5- The Origins and Players" Jan 23, 2024
which i was unable to stop. diana muir assisted don ruh with the scrolls of onteora, and they continue to collaborate. the compendium is unclear how long the two have been associated but we have located evidence that muir was editing ruhs genealogy information in 2017. at the same time muir made an unflattering review of zena halperns book, the templar mission to oak island and beyond. zena made a point-by-point rebuttal of muirs criticism on her blog, which seemed like a targeted attack by muir. knowing muirs past involvement with forged mormon documents and other issues, the collaboration between ruh and muir raises some serious red flags. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents - Part 5- The Origins and Players" Jan 23, 2024
muirs past involvement with forged mormon documents and other issues, the collaboration between ruh and muir raises some serious red flags. conclusion - throughout this series compendium investigations has not only pointed out just one anomaly with these documents, but many that have no reasonable explanation. what we must not do is ignore the facts and the incoherencies that have been uncovered in this investigation, which would be accepting fiction as truth. this is not helping to unravel the mystery of oak island, which is our paramount concern. thank you for reading our series. pleasevisit www.theoakislandcompendium.com for the entire article, as this is only an excerpt. 	Spino and Wheatley "Bill Jackson Documents - Part 5- The Origins and Players" Jan 23, 2024
last week, in part 1 of our series, the mystery of the oak island postcard, we discussed how the postcard was edited and airbrushed which hid an important structure in the background that could possibly be john smiths house. compendium investigations continues our series by looking at other details in the postcard and other similar pictures to determine the date when the original picture was taken. the back of the postcard indicates that it was a nova scotia souvenir postcard, blue nose series. this type of postcard was printed after the turn of the century, roughly 1907-1915. the corresponding operation on oak island at the time was the old gold salvage and wrecking company of 1909. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART II" Nov 21, 2023
the corresponding operation on oak island at the time was the old gold salvage and wrecking company of 1909. so, it would be logical to assume the picture was taken in 1909? not necessarily, because an older picture could have been used for the postcard. compendium investigations began analyzing other features of the postcard to see if there was any identifying information to help date the picture. keeping in mind, that dan blankenship and many current and past oak island researchers believed the picture was from 1861, when the steam boiler exploded. a possible clue is the people that are pictured in the background. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART II" Nov 21, 2023
a possible clue is the people that are pictured in the background. the late researcher, paul wroclawski mentioned that in newspaper articles in the 1860s, it was noted that up to a hundred idle tourists would be watching the treasure hunting activities per day on oak island. this picture was cited as an example of this scenario and brings up the idea of possible contamination of the area by these visitors. when blowing up the picture, compendium investigations noticed that the attire worn by these people indicates a turn of the century period of 1900. this seems to narrow down the possibilities of the picture to the oak island treasure company, circa 1897 and the old gold salvage and wrecking company circa 1909. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART II" Nov 21, 2023
of the picture to the oak island treasure company, circa 1897 and the old gold salvage and wrecking company circa 1909. compendium investigations analyzed several pictures from the 1897 and 1909 operations to see if there were any differences. after reviewing the pictures, it is apparent that the postcard picture was indeed taken during the old gold salvage and wrecking company operation in 1909. it was determined that the boiler, riggings, derrick, and other features in the 1909 pictures were a match with the money pit postcard. there were no such features matching in the oak island treasure company 1897 pictures. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART II" Nov 21, 2023
there were no such features matching in the oak island treasure company 1897 pictures. although, there was one key feature omitted in the postcard if it was taken in 1909. there were no temporary buildings/shelters visible in the picture that were there in 1909. its the compendiums opinion that this was either because they were edited out, obscured by steam, or had been taken down prior to the picture being taken. when comparing the three pictures identified as the money pit postcard scene, we notice what appears to be john smiths barn in all three pictures. pictures 1 and 2 are the exact same scene but picture 2 is not fully edited. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART II" Nov 21, 2023
pictures 1 and 2 are the exact same scene but picture 2 is not fully edited. picture 3 reveals a slight difference, showing less barrels than the first two pictures. the question is which scene was taken first, pics 1/2 or pic 3? another question is what were in these barrels? are they just supplies that were used by the 1909 operation or were these barrels taken out of the money pit? this is important because there have been many references to barrels being found in the money pit by different operations. it has always been speculated that these barrels were treasure related, but theres strong evidence to suggest they may have been connected to smuggling activity that was using oak island for covert operations. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART II" Nov 21, 2023
theres strong evidence to suggest they may have been connected to smuggling activity that was using oak island for covert operations. as mentioned in part 1 of our series, in season 1 of the curse of oak island, episode 3, voices from the grave, it is stated that the money pit postcard scene is identified with 1861. there is a picture of the scene shown during the episode that was push pinned to a corkboard, apparently in the blankenship home that served as the initial war room location. the interesting part about this picture is that it seems to be a clearer copy of pics 1/2 and shows a missing detail. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART II" Nov 21, 2023
part about this picture is that it seems to be a clearer copy of pics 1/2 and shows a missing detail. it appears there is writing and numbers on these barrels. it is unclear what these symbols mean or who put them there. the money pit postcard was edited, so it makes sense that this writing would not appear in the postcard. although, this is not the case for picture 3, unless it was also edited out of that picture for some reason. was the writing on these barrels in reference to the depth at which they were discovered? isnt it interesting that in robert restalls sketch of the money pit, which showed the spiral tunnel, you can observe barrels on a platform at 104 depth? 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART II" Nov 21, 2023
in this final part of our series, the mystery of the oak island postcard, compendium investigations is focusing on the structure that was hidden in the money pit postcard picture. it was caught in a photograph that appeared in world wide magazine in may 1920. this photograph was taken at the same time as the postcard picture but at a slightly different angle. compendium investigations has demonstrated that the photograph was taken in 1909 during the old gold salvage and wrecking company operation. the photograph reveals what appears to be a roof of a house with a chimney in the middle of the roof, at a lower elevation. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
appears to be a roof of a house with a chimney in the middle of the roof, at a lower elevation. in part i, compendium investigations proposed that this hidden structure may have been john smiths house that was the alleged location of the elusive 90 ft stone. compendium investigations gathered information on what we know about the location of smiths house and barn. in the oak island treasure company prospectus of 1893, there is a diagram that shows the general location of the house and barn in relation to the money pit location. this is the basis for many subsequent references to the location of both structures. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
this is the basis for many subsequent references to the location of both structures. this is also illustrated in the macphie reports, but according to compendium investigations analysis, this does not coincide with the location of the structure in the world wide magazine - money pit photograph. further analysis was needed. according to the 1959 survey by fred nolan and george bates (pic 1) you can clearly see the old house foundation labeled in close proximity to the alleged money pit location. in newspaper articles, the house was noted as being 12 to 15 feet away from the money pit, although this seems to be in error and was 45 further feet away then that measurement. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
away from the money pit, although this seems to be in error and was 45 further feet away then that measurement. the roper survey of 1937 (pic 2) and the lozier survey of 1916 (pic 3), both show this same foundation with certain variations that confirm the foundations existence. is there any more evidence to support this structures location? there have been no known photographs of john smiths house. in reports compiled by researcher les macphie, he used a photograph that shows a structure with a note, smiths house?. it is also labeled, money pit area from south shore cove 1860s. macphies source for this photograph was the oak island mystery, by r.v. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
labeled, money pit area from south shore cove 1860s. macphies source for this photograph was the oak island mystery, by r.v. harris in 1958. in studying the photograph, compendium investigations is confident in saying the structure is not john smiths house, but his barn. it is somewhat deceptive because of the angle from which the photograph was taken from the south shore. it is also apparent that the photograph was taken in 1909 and not the 1860s by the rigging and buildings shown in the photo. compendium investigations has found numerous errors by r.v. harris in his information and have found him not to be a reliable informant for information regarding oak island. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
harris in his information and have found him not to be a reliable informant for information regarding oak island. during our investigation, an aerial photograph from the summer of 1931, with the chappell shaft visible, caught our attention. we studied several of these photographs looking for clues regarding this mystery. in the recent, john smiths home of secrets short by the curse of oak island, this photograph is detailed. it shows a pile of stones/boulders that the crew believes are the remnants of john smiths foundation. the crew used the roper survey, that was referenced earlier, to locate what they believe was the location of smiths foundation. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
the crew used the roper survey, that was referenced earlier, to locate what they believe was the location of smiths foundation. compendium investigations concurs with our colleagues that this is possibly the remnants of that structure . was it john smiths foundation? it appears possible based on the surveys and sketches that our investigation has detailed. although, it does not match the mystery structure that has been identified by the world wide magazine photograph. compendium investigations was able to locate a sketch from gilbert heddens operation on oak island in 1935/36 that appears to show the location of the house in the world wide magazine photograph from 1909. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
oak island in 1935/36 that appears to show the location of the house in the world wide magazine photograph from 1909. this structure is labeled as old foundation on the sketch with well and money pit labeled for reference. hedden refers to this old foundation as being located in the hollow which is the surrounding area which is at a lower elevation then the money pit area. based on this information and the other surveys and sketches, it seems likely that there were multiple structures on lot 18, owned by john smith. but how can this be possible? in the article, tracking oak island treasure, following the smith family. by doug crowell and kel hancock of the original blockhouse blog, they wrote, he (john smith) purchased lot 18 (the money pit lot) in june of 1795, and the deed is written in such a way as to infer that a structure already existed on this lot, and stories say he used the 90 foot stone as part of the fireplace in the new house that he was building. compendium investigations found the deed and it reads as follows, lot of land situated lying and being on oak island, in the township of chester and county aforesaid, being known by lot number eighteen and described by running south thirty degrees west, on the west line sixty six rods, on the east line sixty three rods containing four acres more or less with all the buildings and improvements thereon and all rights privileges advantages, trees, wood, water, water courses, and other appurtenances there is belonging.. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
the buildings and improvements thereon and all rights privileges advantages, trees, wood, water, water courses, and other appurtenances there is belonging.. is there more evidence to suggest pre-existing buildings were on lot 18 in 1795? in a letter from john hunter-duvar of the historical society of nova scotia to george cooke of the oak island association in 1864, he asked about the 90ft stone. it was mentioned by mr. cooke in a newspaper article regarding oak island. mr. cooke replied: about 40 years ago (1824), at a time when nothing was doing at the island and when the prospects of the treasure seekers appeared altogether hopeless. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
at a time when nothing was doing at the island and when the prospects of the treasure seekers appeared altogether hopeless. mr. smith built what was then called his new house. in building it, he found that this interesting stone would suit admirably a corner in the back part of the chimney, the flat side out. fourteen years ago (1850) mr. smith pointed out the stone then and i believe still in the chimney, and assured me that it was the identical stone taken out of the money pit on the island, in his presence. there are other references that suggest a new house or new farmhouse was built by smith on lot 18. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
his presence. there are other references that suggest a new house or new farmhouse was built by smith on lot 18. it should be noted that fred nolan made a special treasure map of oak island and on this map, he had a very interesting landmark. it shows site of smith homestead 1804. how could this be the site of smiths homestead when he didnt build his new home on lot 18 until 1824, some twenty years later? based on the evidence, it is compendium investigations opinion that there was indeed a pre-existing house that was near the money pit. john smith lived in this house and started raising his family of 13 children, although six died on the island. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
john smith lived in this house and started raising his family of 13 children, although six died on the island. this may be the reason why smith built another home further away from the money pit for safety reasons. we believe that this new home was captured in the world wide magazine article photograph and is the only known picture of smiths house that held the 90 ft. stone. this suggests that the location of the money pit was known prior to 1795. this reinforces that the origin story of the three boys finding the money pit was pure fiction and raises major questions about what happened on oak island. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
of the three boys finding the money pit was pure fiction and raises major questions about what happened on oak island. it should be noted that compendium investigations report called the real 90ft stone, proposed that the tory stone may be the original 90ft stone. the idea that the stone originated from another structure located in the area was also put forth. considering the deed for lot 18 mentions buildings, this has now become a stronger possibility. compendium investigations will update our readers about this developing story as we uncover new evidence. we hope you enjoyed our series. please watch for updates as they are discovered. 	Spino and Wheatley "MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD PART III" Nov 21, 2023
the money pit postcard is a very iconic piece of oak island history that captures work at the money pit with a boiler and several people around it in the background. the biggest question that has been attached to it is when was the picture taken? in season 1 of the curse of oak island, episode 3, voices from the grave, the picture is shown, and attributed to 1861, which was during the time of the oak island association operation when reportedly the boiler exploded, and a man was killed. this opinion was backed up by dan blankenship, and many other very notable current and past researchers. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD, PART 1" Oct 29, 2023
this opinion was backed up by dan blankenship, and many other very notable current and past researchers. in this picture, there is a building to the right that is believed to have been john smiths barn. it was also believed to be the earliest known picture of work at the money pit. compendium investigations noticed something very intriguing about the picture which launched our research into it. compendium investigations located what appears to be an original picture of the scene that was used to make the postcard. you can notice what appears to be fog or haze on the left side of the picture in the background. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD, PART 1" Oct 29, 2023
you can notice what appears to be fog or haze on the left side of the picture in the background. the compendium believes this is most likely a discharge of steam from the boiler that showed up in the picture. it appears whoever made the postcard edited and airbrushed the original picture to make the finished product very pretty and neat. this seems to have been standard practice at the time and not anything out of the ordinary. although, compendium investigations located another picture of the same scene that appears to indicate that this steam in the picture is hiding a very significant structure. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD, PART 1" Oct 29, 2023
picture of the same scene that appears to indicate that this steam in the picture is hiding a very significant structure. the compendium located an article from the wide world magazine, may 1920 called pirate gold. the buried treasure of mahone bay by walter noble burns. the picture in the beginning of the article is the exact same scene as the postcard picture but at a slightly different moment and angle. in the left side of the picture there appears to be a roof of a house with a chimney in the middle of it. this structure matches the same description as john smiths house, with the position of the chimney in the same spot that supposedly held the 90ft stone. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD, PART 1" Oct 29, 2023
description as john smiths house, with the position of the chimney in the same spot that supposedly held the 90ft stone. it appears that the house is at a slightly lower elevation. there is no known picture of john smiths house that has been confirmed. this is important because smiths house and barn were always used as landmarks to locate the original money pit, and if this is correct, the picture could potentially be used to pinpoint the exact location of the money pit. as our series continues, we will examine some more details from these pictures and others that reveal some very interesting observations. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD, PART 1" Oct 29, 2023
as our series continues, we will examine some more details from these pictures and others that reveal some very interesting observations. this includes evidence that reveals when the postcard picture was taken. we will also be looking at several maps and surveys of the money pit area that do not agree on the exact location of smiths house/foundation. this indicates a real possibility that smiths house/foundation was being obscured and the exact location of the money pit was not where everyone thought it was. this harkens back to the famous quote from indiana jones and raiders of the lost ark, theyre digging in the wrong place!. 	Spino and Wheatley "THE MYSTERY OF THE MONEY PIT POSTCARD, PART 1" Oct 29, 2023
on last nights season premiere of the curse of oak island, an interesting artifact was discovered on lot 5 by gary drayton and laird niven. it was pinpointed by gary with his metal detector in the circular depression and dug out by laird. after the initial inspection it was called a possible iron latch. it was then taken to the interpretive center for analysis by emma culligan, the teams archaeometallurgist. after scanning, the results were quite interesting. emma determined that it didnt match anything that had been discovered on the island previously. laird then explains that it did metallurgically match some artifacts that were sent to him from the william phips homestead in maine. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E1: ON THE MONEY ANALYSIS November 8, 2023
then explains that it did metallurgically match some artifacts that were sent to him from the william phips homestead in maine. laird identified this piece as a river raft spike. this led to conjecture that this is direct evidence that the william phips theory regarding the treasure of la concepcion being buried on oak island is correct. the problem with this theory is that the historical facts dont support such a conclusion. a river raft spike was used in the making of rafts and bundling of logs. they served as fasteners to keep rafts and logs bound together and were typically used in the logging industry. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E1: ON THE MONEY ANALYSIS November 8, 2023
they served as fasteners to keep rafts and logs bound together and were typically used in the logging industry. lumber production was very important in acadia in the 1600s. on the la have river near present-day lunenburg county, a lumber and export business was founded by nicolas denys that produced oak and elm planks, beams, and rafters to provide return cargoes for ships bound for france. toward the end of the 17th century, the acadians operated water-powered sawmills in the amherst, minas basin, and port royal areas. if the dating of this artifact is correct, this suggests that this piece was involved with logging in the mahone bay area. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E1: ON THE MONEY ANALYSIS November 8, 2023
the dating of this artifact is correct, this suggests that this piece was involved with logging in the mahone bay area. it is not uncommon for these spikes to wash up on the shore from the surrounding area. the question is how can it be a metallurgical match for an artifact from the phips homestead site in maine? "from 1986 through 2001, dr. robert l, bradley led a dedicated team of staff and volunteers in the excavation of the phips plantation in woolwich, maine. the homestead was constructed between 1639 and 1646, and was abandoned and destroyed on august 14, 1676, in a wabanaki raid during king phillip\'s war.". 	Spino and Wheatley S11E1: ON THE MONEY ANALYSIS November 8, 2023
between 1639 and 1646, and was abandoned and destroyed on august 14, 1676, in a wabanaki raid during king phillip\'s war.". the site was the birthplace and childhood home of sir william phips, the first american to be knighted the king of england, and the first royal governor of massachusetts bay colony. sir william phips was born at nequasset (now woolwich, maine), in 1651, the son of james phips, a gunsmith from bristol, england. his father died when he was six years old. after tending to the familys sheep until the age of 18, he became an apprentice to a ship carpenter and after serving him for four years, he moved to boston. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E1: ON THE MONEY ANALYSIS November 8, 2023
of 18, he became an apprentice to a ship carpenter and after serving him for four years, he moved to boston. it appears that phips left the family homestead in 1669. the nequasset area was very remote and was one the first british settlements encountered from the north and frequently attacked through the years. it was always portrayed that phips came from a very poor background, which was not entirely true. it seems this was perpetuated to build up phips image of a rags to riches story. it is believed that phips father, james and his business partner, john white, who phips mother remarried, operated a trading post/mercantile. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E1: ON THE MONEY ANALYSIS November 8, 2023
it is believed that phips father, james and his business partner, john white, who phips mother remarried, operated a trading post/mercantile. its very likely that the river raft spike originated out of this area and in the hands of the wabanaki/french and made its way back to acadia either through trade or raids. it is highly unlikely that the spike was saved by phips for almost twenty years and then left on oak island. it will be interesting to see if any new information is updated regarding this artifact. please join us next wednesday for our next episode analysis. please visit www.theoakislandcompendium.com good day from the compendium! 	Spino and Wheatley S11E1: ON THE MONEY ANALYSIS November 8, 2023
in last nights episode, chain reaction, rick, alex and gary are working in the southeast corner of the swamp near the stone road feature when another chain and hook were found. gary inspects the chain and states that it looks old, and he believes it was used for loading and unloading cargo in the swamp area. another chain and hook were found in last weeks episode and is awaiting analysis in emma culligans lab at the interpretive center. while continuing to work in the area, gary then finds pieces of wood with iron spikes embedded in them. he believes the spike in the wood is a rose head spike and dates the piece from the 1700s or older. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E10: CHAIN REACTION ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 17, 2024
he believes the spike in the wood is a rose head spike and dates the piece from the 1700s or older. the team believes that this may indicate some sort of structure was built in this area. this brings up fred nolans belief that a dam feature was built in the swamp. to be fair, it should be noted that fred also believed and had evidence that the swamp was used as a dump by the residents of the island in the 1800s, so its not surprising that something is always found in the marshy bog. next, we are taken to the interpretive center where archeologist laird niven is there to reveal some information on a couple of objects previously found at the lot 5 excavation area. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E10: CHAIN REACTION ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 17, 2024
laird niven is there to reveal some information on a couple of objects previously found at the lot 5 excavation area. the first piece is the engraved stone that was found by archeologist jamie kouba. after an xrf scan, emma culligan reported there was iron residue in the groove of the stone that indicated, as laird suggested, that the piece was a whetstone that was used for sharpening tools and knives. the other artifact was identified by jamie kouba as decorative metal, maybe from a chest or drawer. this seems to be inaccurate as the piece resembles a crochet hook, but the team was unclear of the exact identification of the artifact. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E10: CHAIN REACTION ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 17, 2024
be inaccurate as the piece resembles a crochet hook, but the team was unclear of the exact identification of the artifact. emma said the iron composition of the piece is english, possibly dating to the late 1600s to 1700s and similar, but not exact to the william phips artifacts from maine previously mentioned several times in continuous episodes. the scene shifts to the lot 5 excavation site, where the archeologists and jack begley are working the area. its mentioned that they believe there was a staircase and cellar in the structure. archeologist helen sheldon shows jack a piece of unglazed stoneware that was found at the site that dates from the mid 1600s to mid-1700s. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E10: CHAIN REACTION ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 17, 2024
shows jack a piece of unglazed stoneware that was found at the site that dates from the mid 1600s to mid-1700s. archeologist jamie kouba then discovers a glass bead that she proposes is perhaps venetian. this then begins speculation that this site could be much older than they originally thought. its important to remember that glass beads of this sort were used for trade with the indigenous populations. its very possible that this piece was used by whoever was on oak island to trade for things they needed with the local mi\'kmaq in the area, most likely from the 1600s to 1700s. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E10: CHAIN REACTION ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 17, 2024
island to trade for things they needed with the local mi\'kmaq in the area, most likely from the 1600s to 1700s. we are then taken back to the interpretive center, where blacksmith carmen legge visits to render his opinion on some of the recent finds by the team. carmen inspects the pieces of wood with spikes embedded in them and suggests that they could be part of an underground structure that was used to illuminate an area by hanging something up like a lantern. he then inspects another artifact that was found that gary suggested may have been a wrought iron fastener dated from the 1700s or older. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E10: CHAIN REACTION ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 17, 2024
another artifact that was found that gary suggested may have been a wrought iron fastener dated from the 1700s or older. carmen suggests that it was a tool, a set to drive pins into wood. he suggests that it may have been used for planking in shipbuilding. this would reinforce the possibility of shipbuilding going on at oak island that the compendium has previously suggested. carmen then looks at the chain that was discovered last week that had the three other chains connected to the main chain and hook. he suggests it was used as a boon for cargo such as treasure chests. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E10: CHAIN REACTION ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 17, 2024
he suggests it was used as a boon for cargo such as treasure chests. he says that the main chain and hook are old and handmade dating to no later than 1650 but adds the three other chains are more modern and machine made. this suggests to the compendium that the main piece was repurposed for a very long period of time and not necessarily indicating someone being on the island in 1650. the episode concludes when the team meets in the war room to discuss imaging results from aladdins cave. while looking at the images, a part of the cave is shown that looks like a right angle. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E10: CHAIN REACTION ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 17, 2024
while looking at the images, a part of the cave is shown that looks like a right angle. dr. ian spooner remarks, you would not get that right angle naturally. dr. spooners credentials according to the acadia university website, ian spooner (p. geo, ph.d.) has been a professor at acadia in the department of earth and environmental science for the past 26 years. he has supervised 30 masters and 48 b.sc. honours theses to datehe has served with a number of professional organizations and was recently awarded the distinguished service award by the atlantic geoscience society and the acadia faculty of pure and applied science teaching award. whats concerning about dr. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E10: CHAIN REACTION ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 17, 2024
in last nights episode, plugged up, at the southeast corner of the swamp near the stone road feature, gary drayton is metal detecting in the area, and he finds a small object. after looking at the object, gary is uncertain what the piece exactly is but says it looks like a small fastener. the artifact is bagged and tagged and will be sent to the interpretive center for further testing. back in the same area, gary and rick are metal detecting and find some very interesting pieces. after further inspection, it is broken pottery. the first is pottery is white and has many pieces. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E11: PLUGGED UP ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan24, 2024
after further inspection, it is broken pottery. the first is pottery is white and has many pieces. it also includes a handle. then gary finds more pottery but different kinds that are in the same area. its speculated that this might mean it was a place that was being used for transporting treasure. it should be noted, as the compendium mentioned last week, that the swamp was used by 19th century residents of the island and various searchers as a dump per fred nolan. its not surprising that you would find broken pottery in this area if that was the case. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E11: PLUGGED UP ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan24, 2024
its not surprising that you would find broken pottery in this area if that was the case. the scene shifted to the lot 5 excavation area where archaeologist helen sheldon was working with alex lagina, and she showed him a piece of european flint that was found at the site. it was used for starting fires. it wasnt clear what time period the artifact was from but most likely in the same 1700s era that the other artifacts appear to be dated from. alex, while sifting, found thin pieces of copper that were compared to copper sheeting found previously. blacksmith carmen legge believed that that copper sheeting was from a box that held valuables. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E11: PLUGGED UP ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan24, 2024
blacksmith carmen legge believed that that copper sheeting was from a box that held valuables. this copper appeared to be decorative, and it was speculated that it had the same purpose, but it will be sent to emma at the interpretive center for further testing. back at the southeast corner of the swamp, gary is metal detecting again and finds a log. it is speculated that this log was used as a roller and was utilized in the unloading of valuables from a ship from the shore. also, a piece of wood that resembles what gary called, planking from a ship is unearthed. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E11: PLUGGED UP ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan24, 2024
also, a piece of wood that resembles what gary called, planking from a ship is unearthed. then the fact that fred nolan found pieces of ships in the swamp is mentioned. these pieces will be carbon dated and an approximate date range will be assessed. the excavation continues in the same area and while working, a very interesting feature is uncovered. jack notices what looks like a wooden structure at the bottom of the digging. after further investigation, it looks like pieces of wood have been cut and worked by man and placed together. it is then suggested that this wood may be a wall that fred nolan discovered in the area. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E11: PLUGGED UP ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan24, 2024
in last nights episode, diggin back in, metal detectorist, gary drayton and jack begley are working in the southeast corner of the swamp, near the stone road feature. they uncover a piece of notched wood that they describe as similar to pieces found at the u-shaped structure at smiths cove. it is speculated that this piece of wood may be related to a boundary of the road and placed underneath it to provide stability to the area. rick is called over to look at the artifact and he remarks that it looks like a dowel/pin fit inside of it to hold it together. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 31, 2024
look at the artifact and he remarks that it looks like a dowel/pin fit inside of it to hold it together. the wood will be tested to give an approximate age of the artifact. at the lot 5 excavation area, alex lagina and the archeologists are working the site looking for more artifacts. while working, archeologist fiona steele discovers some pieces of iron that are speculated as being parts of a treasure chest or decorative box. it is also stated that the excavation site is much larger than originally thought and too large for just one family residing there. the team believes it may have been a group of people working there. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 31, 2024
the team believes it may have been a group of people working there. the artifacts are bagged and tagged and sent to emma culligan, the teams archeometallurgist for further testing. the scene shifts to the new lab, which is taking the place of the temporary lab at the interpretive center. blacksmith carmen legge visits to give his opinion on some of the artifacts that have been discovered on lot 5. the first objects are several thin copper pieces that carmen inspects. he says that some look tapered and thicker than others and speculates that the decorative pattern on it may have been part of a jewelry box or chest. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 31, 2024
thicker than others and speculates that the decorative pattern on it may have been part of a jewelry box or chest. emma mentions that the pieces have a mixture of copper and iron. the next artifacts are the iron pieces which carmen mentioned look like straps that would have been on a fortified box, specifically a strong box/money box. emma states the chemical makeup is lead and iron, which carmen found unusual. emma said that it is typical of old english iron with a date ranging from the late 1600s to 1700s, which launched speculation about william phips and the theory of his involvement on oak island. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 31, 2024
from the late 1600s to 1700s, which launched speculation about william phips and the theory of his involvement on oak island. back at the lot 5 excavation area, the archeologists and alex lagina continued their work. archeologist moya mcdonald discovered another bead, that looks exactly like the one previously discovered. its stated that it appears to be glass and possibly venetian from the 14th century. as they continued to work, archeologist lindy martin uncovered a round piece of metal that appeared to be a coin. after studying its features, the ends appeared milled which prevented counterfeiting. this was created by sir issac newton, who was once master of mint in britain. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 31, 2024
this was created by sir issac newton, who was once master of mint in britain. compendium investigations immediately thought of his colleague and friend, the astronomer edmund halley, who was also involved with the mint. it has been theorized that halley was involved with oak island and the time frame fits the late 1600s to 1700s period. compendium investigations will be exploring this possibility and will provide our readers with a new investigation into the possibility in the near future. we are taken back to the southeast corner of the swamp, where marty lagina and gary drayton are working. as they are going through the spoils, gary finds a barrel stave and it is mentioned that several similar pieces have been found in the area. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E12: DIGGING BACK IN ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 31, 2024
in last nights episode, team time, rick lagina, craig tester, and metal detectorist, gary drayton continue working at the southern edge of the swamp near the stone road feature. after further excavation it reveals what appears to be a possible extension of the stone road feature that appears to form a ramp that extends to the waterfront. craig tester describes this area as a possible mini wharf. the stone road is discussed with the possible creation date in the 1500s as posed by researcher, terry deveau. the scene shifts to the interpretive center, where archeometallurgist emma culligan is showing the oak island team the coin that lindy martin recently discovered at the lot 5 excavation area. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E13: TEA TIME ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 7, 2024
emma culligan is showing the oak island team the coin that lindy martin recently discovered at the lot 5 excavation area. emma has completed a ct scan of the coin, and it reveals what appears to be a british half penny that features king george iii on it. the coin was minted from 1760-1820. the team estimates this one is from around 1770. when it was actually deposited on the island is unknown. the glass beads that were found in the same area as the coin were also examined. it is mentioned that they appear to be venetian and were a barter currency. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E13: TEA TIME ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 7, 2024
it is mentioned that they appear to be venetian and were a barter currency. gary states they appear to be stretch beads from a bracelet or necklace. it is recommended that the team take the beads to an expert for their analysis. back at the swamp/stone road site, rick lagina and gary drayton continue going through the spoils when more artifacts are discovered. these pieces have a blue pattern on them that gary identifies as chinese porcelain. it is then explained that the portuguese obtained this porcelain on their exploration in asia and used it for trade. different pieces of porcelain are found and appear to be parts of a teacup and saucer. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E13: TEA TIME ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 7, 2024
different pieces of porcelain are found and appear to be parts of a teacup and saucer. the compendium has mentioned previously that this area was used as a dump in the 1800s, but we also believe that the portuguese were on oak island in the 1500s. the mixture of pieces from different time periods has added to the confusion of who left what and when exactly. we are then taken to halifax with jack begley and charles barkhouse to visit glass bead expert, philip doucette at his home. mr. doucette inspects the beads and mentions that these were a precious commodity at one time. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E13: TEA TIME ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 7, 2024
mr. doucette inspects the beads and mentions that these were a precious commodity at one time. he confirms that they appear to be venetian drawn glass beads. he notices pitting on the ends and says that they are early formulations dating from 1500-1650. he said they were used as trade beads and that 5 or 6 of these would be worth 1 beaver pelt. he also mentioned that the portuguese used these beads for trade and would have had barrels of them at any given time. this again provides possible evidence that the portuguese, french and british were all on oak island and trading with the local mikmaq from as early as the 1500s. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E13: TEA TIME ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 7, 2024
portuguese, french and british were all on oak island and trading with the local mikmaq from as early as the 1500s. back at the swamp, rick and gary are continuing to go through the spoils and they find more pieces of pottery. the first piece looks like a two-toned piece with a black glaze on brown pottery. other pieces that are found look like white stoneware, a blue patterned piece, and an orange glazed piece. they then find what appears to be the sole of a boot. gary mentions you can see where little nails with square shanks held the boot to the sole. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E13: TEA TIME ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 7, 2024
gary mentions you can see where little nails with square shanks held the boot to the sole. gary thought it was from the 1800s or older. this again fits into fred nolans opinion that the area was used as a place to dump broken and worn-out items in the 1800s. what makes it so difficult is ascertaining what is normal refuse and what are legitimate artifacts that suggest any secretive or unusual happenings on oak island at any specific point in time. one thing seems clear to the compendium, there was activity on oak island that starts from at least the 1500s. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E13: TEA TIME ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 7, 2024
in last nights episode, rick and mortar, metal detectorist gary drayton and jack begley are continuing to work in the southeast corner of the swamp near the stone road and stone path. it is noted that this is the deepest part of the swamp. while digging with the excavator, a large boulder was found. it appears to be the same size as the boulders that make up nolans cross. there appeared to be a set of stones next to the boulder that makes a row, and the team speculates that it is a staircase of some kind. it was also noted that the boulder is not well seated and easily moved with the excavator. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E14: RICK AND MORTAR ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 14, 2024
it was also noted that the boulder is not well seated and easily moved with the excavator. it doesnt appear that this boulder was placed there naturally from the movement of glaciers. a thick, shaped board is also found in the area that gary speculates may be a ships planking or decking. he notes no fasteners are in the wood and it was found at a depth of two feet. we are then taken to the lot 5 excavation area where the work continues at the stone foundation. continued work is indicating that the stone line of the foundation appears to be curving, noted by the archeologists as being very bizarre. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E14: RICK AND MORTAR ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 14, 2024
is indicating that the stone line of the foundation appears to be curving, noted by the archeologists as being very bizarre. they mention that the structure was too big for a house, and it occupied multiple groups over different periods in time. this leads to the question, what was going on there? jack begley mentions that they have continued to find broken pottery and glass. archeologist jamie kouba is working in the excavation area when she notices some very hard packed dirt and as she states she suspects that it is mortar or concrete. she says that it is mixed with ash and crushed shale. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E14: RICK AND MORTAR ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 14, 2024
she says that it is mixed with ash and crushed shale. she thinks it may be a crude type of mortar and its mentioned that the team has found other samples of mortar/cement in what is suspected as being the original money pit location at borehole rf-1. jack speculates that there may be a connection between the two sites. the scene shifts to the dumas trailer where roger fortin is talking with rick lagina, alex lagina, and scott barlow whose birthday was yesterday when this episode appeared. the team is interested to hear the dendrochronology report on the wood sample taken from the tunnel that is running at the bottom of the garden shaft. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E14: RICK AND MORTAR ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 14, 2024
the dendrochronology report on the wood sample taken from the tunnel that is running at the bottom of the garden shaft. craig tester calls and gives the team the results. he states the greatest probability of the age of the wood was 1631-1684. there is also a possibility that the wood is aged from 1529-1556 and also a date range beginning at 1735 is possible. while the 1600s appears to be the best probability of the woods age, two things must be factored in. one, the wood may be that old, but when was it used in the construction? two, there is a possibility the other dates could apply to the wood, but again when was it used for the tunnel? 	Spino and Wheatley S11E14: RICK AND MORTAR ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 14, 2024
there is a possibility the other dates could apply to the wood, but again when was it used for the tunnel? what we can say is that old wood was used to make a tunnel that appears to have served some sort of purpose. hopefully, more evidence that the team uncovers will give us all the answers we seek. the scene shifts back to the swamp where the team continues to work. gary drayton, jack begley, and rick lagina discuss the new boulder that was previously uncovered earlier in the episode. it is now more exposed, and it is noted that it looks conical which immediately brings up the comparison to the boulders that comprise nolans cross. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E14: RICK AND MORTAR ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 14, 2024
and it is noted that it looks conical which immediately brings up the comparison to the boulders that comprise nolans cross. is this boulder related to nolans cross and what was its purpose? the team notes that the rocks around one side of the boulder seem to line up with the boulder and it is speculated that this forms a sort of ramp. as they are looking around the area, gary notices another piece of what he calls, planking and believes it is part of a ship. this piece seems to have what gary explained was tongue and groove construction that he believes was used in ship building. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E14: RICK AND MORTAR ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 14, 2024
this piece seems to have what gary explained was tongue and groove construction that he believes was used in ship building. the episode concludes at the interpretive center, where archeometallurgist, emma culligan, is meeting with the team that comprises archeologist laird niven, alex lagina, jack begley, and scott barlow. they are looking at the suspected mortar material that was unearthed at the lot 5 excavation area. emma has used the xrd device to analyze the sample and she states its not mortar, but a type of soil. its mentioned that the soil was not naturally placed at lot 5 and seems to be artificial. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E14: RICK AND MORTAR ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 14, 2024
its mentioned that the soil was not naturally placed at lot 5 and seems to be artificial. it then is revealed that emma has checked for matches in her database for other samples that correspond, and she has found a match. she states that the sample matches those found in the garden shaft, borehole c-18.5 and borehole c-28. these locations are all in the same general location in the garden shaft area. why were these soil samples at the lot 5 excavation area? this led to speculation that it was tied to william phips and his theorized involvement with oak island. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E14: RICK AND MORTAR ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Feb 14, 2024
in last nights episode, piling on, we are taken to the war room where the oak island team is meeting with archeoastronomer adriano gaspani and his interpreter michael amadio. professor gaspani was asked if he could find a correlation between the stone triangle that was located on the south shore and, what fred nolan called, the pirate piles that were located on lot 15. gaspani begins with the stone piles. he suggests that these five stone piles were placed there using astronomical calculations using the rising and setting of the sun and moon. he suggests that these alignments only appear every 18 and  years. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E17: PILING ON ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS
he suggests that these alignments only appear every 18 and  years. he states that because there are so many alignments it appears that the formation could have been formed in 1250ad. dr. gaspani suggests that the knights templar were behind the formation, which the compendium believes is based on his past research that involves the theory that the order of the temple used such alignments when building churches in europe. professor gaspani continued with his presentation, now focusing on the stone triangle. gaspani says because the stone triangle is no longer there, he used the calculations given by the oak island team. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E17: PILING ON ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS
gaspani says because the stone triangle is no longer there, he used the calculations given by the oak island team. gaspani explains that there are stone alignments in the triangle that show the sunrise and sunset at the winter solstice on the same day. gaspani goes on to explain that he believes that whoever did this was a navigator who knew both astronomy and geometry. gaspani then speculates that people from europe came to oak island in the 1200s-1300s and codified a message by arranging stones and piles of stones in an astronomically significant way that was not used by common people. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E17: PILING ON ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS
a message by arranging stones and piles of stones in an astronomically significant way that was not used by common people. he suggests it was a secret that not everyone was supposed to know about and puts forth the templars as possible builders. why the knights templar, at the height of their power, would do this in the oak island area in 1200-1250ad is still uncertain. the scene shifts to lot 15 where the stone piles discovered by fred nolan were located and the remnants remain. metal detectorist gary drayton and jack begley searched the area for any possible finds. gary records a hit and uncovers a piece of lead. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E17: PILING ON ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS
gary records a hit and uncovers a piece of lead. it is described as decorative in appearance and could be related to other pieces of lead that the oak island team has found previously. the piece was bagged and tagged and will be taken to emma culligan in the lab for further analysis. dating of lead is difficult because in most cases lead was used and used for hundreds of years, so narrowing down a specific date of deposit is almost impossible. we were then taken to the garden shaft where the dumas team has been working since the brief delay from hurricane lee. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E17: PILING ON ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS
were then taken to the garden shaft where the dumas team has been working since the brief delay from hurricane lee. dumas has reached the top of the tunnel that runs below the garden shaft. gary drayton is brought in to see if he can detect any artifacts. he gets a hit and identifies it as iron. it appears to be some sort of nail or perhaps pin that will be sent to emma for testing. another hit is made, and gary says it is metal and it has a similar look as the other piece. later the team starts to take out pieces of the top of the tunnel and notice that the wood has been worked by the use of an adze. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E17: PILING ON ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS
pieces of the top of the tunnel and notice that the wood has been worked by the use of an adze. the wood samples will be sent out for further testing. our analysis concludes at the new lab where archeometallurgist emma culligan meets with the team to provide her analysis of the lead piece found at the stone piles on lot 15. emma echoes the fact that the lead is extremely hard to date but she said it was a near compositional match for another piece of lead found in 2021 on lot 13. that piece is spiral shaped in appearance. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E17: PILING ON ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS
that piece is spiral shaped in appearance. dr. chris macfarlane had previously analyzed the spiral piece and said it may have originated from eastern scandinavia. no date was given, and according to dr. macfarlanes verbiage, it sounded like there were other possibilities that were not mentioned in this clip. this led to speculation of the vikings being on oak island and curiously a map was shown detailing the settlements of the vikings as iceland, greenland, and new brunswick. this was an error since there were no known viking settlements in new brunswick and should have been listed as newfoundland. until next weeks episode. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E17: PILING ON ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS
in last nights episode, heavy lifting, our favorite blacksmith, carmen legge was invited to the interpretive center to give his opinion on some artifacts that were unearthed on lot 5. carmen was shown five objects that were presented on the table, but we only hear about three of them during the telecast. objects 1, 3, and 4, in the attached photo, were discussed in last nights episode. objects 2 and 5 were omitted from the conversation. the first object shown to carmen was called an iron latch, although in last weeks episode, archaeologist laird niven identified it as a river raft spike. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING ANALYSIS Nov 15, 2023
carmen was called an iron latch, although in last weeks episode, archaeologist laird niven identified it as a river raft spike. carmen inspected the piece and asked to see the ct scan for more details. his opinion was that the piece was some sort of wedge that was driven into wood for one-time usage. he suspected that it could have been used to hold horses or oxen together, bundling of wood/lumber together, or used as a sort of hoist or pulley. this last possibility launched the speculation of the william phips theory of the concepcion treasure being buried on oak island. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING ANALYSIS Nov 15, 2023
this last possibility launched the speculation of the william phips theory of the concepcion treasure being buried on oak island. laird added the fact that phips was known to be in nova scotia. there was a long-lasting border dispute between the british and french/indigenous peoples in new england that resulted in ongoing raids and massacres that were extremely violent, brutal, and deadly in the 17th and 18th centuries. the major site of these ongoing conflicts occurred in present day maine. after back-and-forth conflicts, in march 1690, french and indigenous forces attacked falmouth in the massachusetts bay colony, which is present day portland, maine. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING ANALYSIS Nov 15, 2023
conflicts, in march 1690, french and indigenous forces attacked falmouth in the massachusetts bay colony, which is present day portland, maine. the british settlers were all massacred. in retaliation, a raid was planned by the british colonists to take port royal in acadia/nova scotia. a major general was sought to lead the expedition. william phips volunteered to lead the expedition. phips was thought of as a hero because he had helped evacuate british settlers from the war-ravaged area and saved their lives. he had some naval experience, once being in charge of a naval gunship. he was famous for his treasure hunting operation some years previously. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING ANALYSIS Nov 15, 2023
he was famous for his treasure hunting operation some years previously. in april 1690, phips led a very large force of 700 men with seven ships to port royal, the capital of acadia. the french forces only had 70 men guarding the fort with limited weapons. the fort was in the process of being dismantled because a new one was being planned. a peaceful surrender was negotiated. after phips came to the fort, he learned that the french had been moving valuables and stores that were supposed to go to his colonial forces. this angered phips and he withdrew from the terms of the surrender. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING ANALYSIS Nov 15, 2023
this angered phips and he withdrew from the terms of the surrender. he allowed his men to sack the fort, plunder the town, destroy the forts chapel, take private property, kill livestock, and force acadians to take an oath of allegiance to the british king. phips returned immediately to boston, where he was celebrated as a hero. at this documented time of phips being in nova scotia, he did not visit oak island and bury any treasure. his sole purpose was the sacking of port royal. later that year, he would lead another assault, this time on quebec. there is speculation that phips may have been at new ross at some point because the knight of the garter medallion of christopher monck was found there. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING ANALYSIS Nov 15, 2023
have been at new ross at some point because the knight of the garter medallion of christopher monck was found there. its speculated that perhaps monck gave it to phips after his retrieval of treasure from the concepcion, because monck was his major investor. the theory has not been confirmed with any evidence that pinpoints phips physically being in new ross or on oak island. how did the iron wedge spike get to oak island? its very possible it made its way there from trade or possible military acquisition by the french. its also possible that the date of the spike is older than the 1600s and being a widely used object of the time with a variety of uses, it was most likely brought there by colonists. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING ANALYSIS Nov 15, 2023
being a widely used object of the time with a variety of uses, it was most likely brought there by colonists. the next object shown to carmen is what gary identified as an iron fastener with a rose head top. carmen examined the object and looked at the ct scan and believes that it was a broken part of a tool. specifically, a chisel that may have been used in tunneling or digging. the final object that was discussed was what gary thought was a decorative strap that would be found on a box or chest. after carmens inspection he concurred with garys identification but added that it was a bow tie strap and he thought it was of french origin. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING ANALYSIS Nov 15, 2023
concurred with garys identification but added that it was a bow tie strap and he thought it was of french origin. this led him to say he thought that it is indicative of the french being on oak island first. also, in the episode during the excavation on lot 5 at the circular depression, archeologist jamie kouba finds a piece of pottery called anglo-american ware. laird added that the pottery was british and may have originated in the british colony of pennsylvania in the 1770s. this makes perfect sense because most of the early lot owners of oak island were new england planters. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING ANALYSIS Nov 15, 2023
this makes perfect sense because most of the early lot owners of oak island were new england planters. that is where they came from and it\'s very logical that they would have objects that originated from new england and the other colonies that they either brought with them or acquired through trade. there have been many artifacts from the 1750s to 1770s that have been found which are indicative of the new england planters activity on the island. it was also very common that you would find both british and french items in both sides possession through trade or war. updates on these specific artifacts will be examined in future "artifact alley" reports. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E2: HEAVY LIFTING ANALYSIS Nov 15, 2023
in last nights episode, taking their shot, a wood sample from the borehole d.5n-26.5 was c-14 tested and the results came back with a 55.6% probability of a date from 1735 to 1804 ad. this immediately was compared with the duc danville rochefoucauld expedition and the ships log that was found in the nova scotia archives in the r.v. harris collection. it was referenced as a possible indicator of the construction time for the tunnel that the team is seeking. later, core samples of large amounts of wood showed that it was worked by hand with an adze and the tunnel is projected as being 7 to 8 feet in size. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT ANALYSIS BY DANIEL SPINO AND CHARLOTTE WHEATLEY Nov 22, 2023
it was worked by hand with an adze and the tunnel is projected as being 7 to 8 feet in size. this left the team pondering why would such a large tunnel be needed. on lot 5, gary drayton has a metal detector hit that discovers an old lead shot. he also uncovers what gary postulates was a piece of a gun. archaeologist helen sheldon renders her opinion that it was a gun sight. it is bagged and tagged and taken to the interpretive center for further testing by archeometallurgist emma culligan. later during more excavation work, a piece of what was identified as creamware is discovered in the excavation area on lot 5. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT ANALYSIS BY DANIEL SPINO AND CHARLOTTE WHEATLEY Nov 22, 2023
during more excavation work, a piece of what was identified as creamware is discovered in the excavation area on lot 5. this is dated to the mid 1700s. at the interpretive center, it is revealed that the gun piece that was initially thought to be a gun sight was actually a middle ram rod guide from a musket. this dates to the same period as the creamware found and again referenced to the duc danville expedition and ships log theory. the ct scan of the ram rod guide revealed what was referred to as roman numerals engraved in the piece and reminiscent of the roman numerals on the u-shaped structure in smiths cove. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT ANALYSIS BY DANIEL SPINO AND CHARLOTTE WHEATLEY Nov 22, 2023
to as roman numerals engraved in the piece and reminiscent of the roman numerals on the u-shaped structure in smiths cove. at the end of the episode, another view of the lot 5 excavation is shown with more defined excavation pits. analysis compendium investigations feels the wood sample dated from 1735 to 1804 fits perfectly with the settlement of mahone bay. the first settlers came to the area in the 1750s. the first lots were divided and part of a draw for new owners in the early 1760s. robert melvin is believed to have been the owner of lot 5 and was also given lot 6 as a gift from philip payzant, for his friendship and service to his family. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT ANALYSIS BY DANIEL SPINO AND CHARLOTTE WHEATLEY Nov 22, 2023
5 and was also given lot 6 as a gift from philip payzant, for his friendship and service to his family. melvin was part of the massachusetts militia serving in the british army that was stationed in the area during the massacre at payzants trading post on nearby covey island. compendium investigations suspects that the british were on oak island after the massacre and started to build a defensive structure/fort. this most likely included tunnels that were dug to support the planned defenses. it is believed that due to peace treaties struck between the british and french/indigenous peoples starting in 1760, the project was abandoned. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT ANALYSIS BY DANIEL SPINO AND CHARLOTTE WHEATLEY Nov 22, 2023
is believed that due to peace treaties struck between the british and french/indigenous peoples starting in 1760, the project was abandoned. in 1761, melvin arrived back in the chester area as a new england planter and acquired his first oak island lots in 1766. compendium investigations believes that melvin was aware of the workings on oak island and were expanded and used by himself, jonathan prescott, joshua mauger, and others to run a smuggling operation of goods to hide from the british and avoid paying taxes that they felt were unfair and exorbitant. mauger had a known history of questionable business dealings and was almost run out of halifax by general edward cornwallis for dealing with the french. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT ANALYSIS BY DANIEL SPINO AND CHARLOTTE WHEATLEY Nov 22, 2023
history of questionable business dealings and was almost run out of halifax by general edward cornwallis for dealing with the french. mauger avoided this fate by having very powerful connections. compendium investigations suspects that oak island was used as a hiding place for smuggled goods and were stored there until they were sold for profit. jonathan prescott, who would be the justice of the peace of chester, was one of maugers closest associates, both having distilleries in halifax. these lot owners were new england planters and were loyal to the american colonies during the revolutionary war. compendium investigations believes that the scope of the smuggled goods expanded during this time to include weapons, gunpowder, and other necessary war supplies that were needed by the americans. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT ANALYSIS BY DANIEL SPINO AND CHARLOTTE WHEATLEY Nov 22, 2023
smuggled goods expanded during this time to include weapons, gunpowder, and other necessary war supplies that were needed by the americans. compendium investigations believes that there were others involved with oak island prior to the 1750s based on various pieces of evidence. as for the artifacts found on lot 5, they are evidence of a british military/early settler presence on oak island. the middle ram rod guide and the lead shot are consistent with other artifacts found on the island. on neighboring lot 24, in season 6, episode 7, rock solid, gary drayton discovers a british musket ram rod that he believed belonged to an old bess model, which would date to the 1700-1800s. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT ANALYSIS BY DANIEL SPINO AND CHARLOTTE WHEATLEY Nov 22, 2023
discovers a british musket ram rod that he believed belonged to an old bess model, which would date to the 1700-1800s. lead musket balls were also found on lot 24 along with broken pottery. this mirrors the findings on the adjacent lot 5. what was identified as roman numerals were most likely personal, regimental, or inspection markings on the middle ram rod guide. in season 8 episode 24, silver lining, rick lagina finds a piece of pottery identified by dr. aaron taylor as creamware. this was unearthed on the stone pathway leading to the upland from the swamp. it is very interesting that this same type of pottery was found during the lot 5 excavation. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E3: TAKING THEIR SHOT ANALYSIS BY DANIEL SPINO AND CHARLOTTE WHEATLEY Nov 22, 2023
in last nights episode, shear mystery, peter fornetti and gary drayton are metal detecting on the shoreline of lot 5. gary finds what appears to be a cribbing spike that was used in building and attaching timbers together. typically, these items were used in constructing wharves, derricks, platforms, and other constructions. there have been many of these types of spikes found on oak island, so it is a typical find for the crew. although, a possible explanation for this type of old fashioned nail being used may be the unsubstantiated reports of shipbuilding that was going on in the 1700s by then lot owner, casper wollenhaupt, who owned lot 18. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY ANALYSIS Nov 29, 2023
unsubstantiated reports of shipbuilding that was going on in the 1700s by then lot owner, casper wollenhaupt, who owned lot 18. this could have been something that was used for such a purpose in various locations on the island. peter and gary then find what appears to be a handle to a pair of shears or scissors. this brings up the scissors that were found by dan blankenship at smiths cove. gary suggests the 1600s to 1700s time frame for the new artifact. it is also mentioned that lot 5 has produced some interesting finds that include some suspected roman coins, and what is continually identified as a lead barter token but is suspected by compendium investigations as being a whirligig/buzzer made by british soldiers on the island as a toy to pass the time away. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY ANALYSIS Nov 29, 2023
compendium investigations as being a whirligig/buzzer made by british soldiers on the island as a toy to pass the time away. the fact that the lead is the same as the lead cross indicates there may have been a cache of this lead somewhere on the island that was made into musket balls and then into this buzzer. the scene then shifted to the excavation site on lot 5. more creamware is unearthed and archeologist helen sheldon remarks that she has never seen in her 40 years of experience this type of covering up of a site. she mentions that they have found a porcelain teacup, pearlware, creamware, whiteware and etc. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY ANALYSIS Nov 29, 2023
she mentions that they have found a porcelain teacup, pearlware, creamware, whiteware and etc. this suggests some sort of habitation in the area. most likely some sort of military encampment as compendium investigations suggested last week. it then transitions to the fact of charles morris surveying the island in 1762 and creating 32 lots. it suggested that perhaps morris did this to hide what was occurring on oak island because he was a high-ranking freemason. the compendium fails to see the connection. it is also stated that this activity at the excavation site must have been before morris surveyed the island. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY ANALYSIS Nov 29, 2023
it is also stated that this activity at the excavation site must have been before morris surveyed the island. this could be possible, but it may have lasted for several years because they dated the creamware no earlier than 1762. we are then taken to the interpretive center, where blacksmithing expert, carmen legge is brought in to give his opinion on the items found on the lot 5 shoreline by peter fornetti and gary drayton. carmen did not examine the crib spike that was found in this episode but in the past, he has dated others on the island from 1650-1800. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY ANALYSIS Nov 29, 2023
crib spike that was found in this episode but in the past, he has dated others on the island from 1650-1800. its interesting to note that the suspected scissors in question were found right on top of the ground, not buried at any depth. carmen inspects this piece and concurs with gary that it appears to be a pair of shears/scissors. carmen dates the scissors from the 1600s to 1700s. it was then suggested that carmen examine the scissors that dan blankenship discovered and compare them with this newly discovered artifact. after carmens examination, he felt the new piece of scissors was older than the blankenship scissors and dated the new artifact from the 1600s. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY ANALYSIS Nov 29, 2023
he felt the new piece of scissors was older than the blankenship scissors and dated the new artifact from the 1600s. in 1970, dan blankenship discovered his wrought iron scissors beneath one of the smiths cove box drains. the scissors were analyzed, and the artifact was determined to have been forged in the 17th or 18th century and that it was of spanish mexican design. although, it is documented that the smithsonian institution examined the scissors previously and dated them from the middle of the 19th century or earlier. please visit http://www.theoakislandcompendium.com for the entire article and more information. any further updates regarding these finds will appear in our artifact alley installments. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E4: SHEAR MYSTERY ANALYSIS Nov 29, 2023
in last nights episode, muon the horizon, there were three artifacts that were found that were discussed. the first artifact was unearthed on the lot 5 excavation site. jack begley was sifting through some of the spoils and unearthed what appears to be a part of a chain. the proposed chain link was bagged and tagged and was going to be taken to the interpretive center for further testing by emma culligan, the teams archeometallurgist. the artifact was not discussed further in last nights episode, so we will be updating the results as soon as they are made available. the second artifact was found near the money pit area in the spoils of the garden shaft. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E5: MUON THE HORIZON ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 6, 2023
the second artifact was found near the money pit area in the spoils of the garden shaft. gary drayton and charles barkhouse were working in this area. gary pinpointed the object that appeared to him to be a metal wedge. this piece was also on its way to emma culligan for further testing. no update was given during last nights show, but we will pass on any information as soon as it is released. our third artifact was found on lot 5 in the same area as the assortment of coins that were found earlier this season. this area was identified as a hot spot and the coin zone. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E5: MUON THE HORIZON ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 6, 2023
this area was identified as a hot spot and the coin zone. gary drayton and rick lagina were working in this area and unearthed what gary thought was an ancient coin. he remarked that it was a heavy old coin and a bit of ancientness. the piece was bagged and tagged and sent to emma at the interpretive center. fortunately, this artifact was analyzed by emma in the interpretive center and the results were presented. the piece was scanned, and emma concluded that it was lead with small amounts of iron and copper. she proceeded to show an enhanced image that revealed letters on the piece. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E5: MUON THE HORIZON ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 6, 2023
she proceeded to show an enhanced image that revealed letters on the piece. archeologist, laird niven said that that it was not a coin, but a lead bag seal. this brought up the previous seal that was found on the island. emma concluded that it was not a match for that seal that was unearthed in season 8, episode 24, silver lining. this was evident even without testing when comparing both seals. laird elaborated on his opinion by saying that he had found a match for the bag seal. it appears that the seal was used by john lodge cloth packers and was used for bundling cloth for the british army. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E5: MUON THE HORIZON ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 6, 2023
appears that the seal was used by john lodge cloth packers and was used for bundling cloth for the british army. he went on to say that there was a date of 1808 for the attached listing for the company. it was noted that the letter i was being used for the letter j in the word john which was an older practice. this immediately launched speculation that the seal could have been much older than lairds assessment of the 1700s. specifically the claim of the 1500s. upon closer inspection the name of the company was the john lodge and co. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E5: MUON THE HORIZON ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 6, 2023
specifically the claim of the 1500s. upon closer inspection the name of the company was the john lodge and co. packers of london. it is noted that they were cloth packers, and the cloth was used in the making of army uniforms for the british. the picture of the example was found in ontario, canada. it is also mentioned in the listing that another matching seal was found at fort michilimackinac in 2022. fort michilimackinac, on the very northern tip of the lower peninsula of michigan, was initially a french fort from 1715 until 1760. in 1761 the french gave the fort to the british as part of the peace agreement of the french and indian war, also known as the seven years war. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E5: MUON THE HORIZON ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 6, 2023
the british as part of the peace agreement of the french and indian war, also known as the seven years war. in 1761 the british took possession of the fort, and it was a major trading post. the british lost the fort for about a year from 1763-1764 by an attack by the ojibwe people but held possession of it from 1764 until 1781. this is when another fort was built to take its place on nearby mackinac island. it seems clear that if the bag seal on oak island is a match for the seal found at fort michilimackinac, it was from the time period of around 1761 until 1781. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E5: MUON THE HORIZON ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 6, 2023
is a match for the seal found at fort michilimackinac, it was from the time period of around 1761 until 1781. most likely during the earlier period, because of the revolutionary war. this reinforces the continued belief by compendium investigations that there was some sort of british military installation and habitation on oak island in the late 1750s to early 1760s that was abandoned by the british military. this cloth was packed for the british army and is a clear indicator that it was being used for uniforms, which would have been necessary for a prolonged occupation by the british. we will update these artifacts in our continuing feature called artifact alley. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E5: MUON THE HORIZON ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 6, 2023
in last nights episode, the grand opening, archaeologists laird niven and jamie kouba are at the interpretive center where jamie gave the results of the magnometer testing that she completed on lot 5 that was shown in last weeks episode. laird states that the results had some surprises. jamie said that the scan was processed by st. marys university in halifax. she reveals that the results suggest there is a larger rectangular feature that is underneath the circular depression. it was also suggested that this structure was inhabited and abandoned. in a previous episode, the team mentioned that the excavation site seemed to have been filled in with stones and boulders at some point after this initial habitation. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING ARTIFACT/FEATURE ANALYSIS Dec 13, 2023
that the excavation site seemed to have been filled in with stones and boulders at some point after this initial habitation. compendium investigations believes that a british military fortification may have been on lot 5 at the circular depression. due to the shape of the feature that was revealed last night, this could suggest the possibility of a british blockhouse. according to the halifax military heritage preservation society website it says, intended only as temporary works, each blockhouse was about 12 (to 18) feet square and 25 feet in height. each was surrounded by a triangular palisade of double pickets 60 feet long on the long sides and 45 feet long across the rear, about 8 feet high and with musket loopholes. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING ARTIFACT/FEATURE ANALYSIS Dec 13, 2023
feet long on the long sides and 45 feet long across the rear, about 8 feet high and with musket loopholes. the blockhouses themselves were two-story, machicolated structures made of thick horizontal squared timbers, pre-fabricated in the town, with musket loopholes and an opening on each side for a small cannon (likely a short brass 3-pounder) using canister or grape shot, or a swivel-gun. they would have each resembled the fort edward blockhouse that remains today at windsor, nova scotia, only smaller. each had accommodations for a guard consisting of a corporal and 10 to 20 men. the peninsular blockhouses endured for a decade until about the early 1760s, by which time, with the defeat of french forces in north america and the decline of the associated french encouragement and support for native incursions against the british, the threat of native attack had faded. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING ARTIFACT/FEATURE ANALYSIS Dec 13, 2023
decline of the associated french encouragement and support for native incursions against the british, the threat of native attack had faded. the blockhouses were abandoned after about 1761, and their sites passed into private ownership; they soon fell into ruins and disappeared over the next two decades. this sounds very similar to the excavation area and artifacts discovered at the site on lot 5. while working at the lot 5 excavation area, archaeologist fiona steele discovered more pieces of creamware. its stated that the archaeologists have found many pieces of creamware and would try to put them together and make a complete vessel. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING ARTIFACT/FEATURE ANALYSIS Dec 13, 2023
that the archaeologists have found many pieces of creamware and would try to put them together and make a complete vessel. it was also stated that they have been finding more pottery as they have dug deeper. this suggests habitation and reinforces the idea of a military installation that was used for a period of time and then abandoned. in this same area, archeologists jamie kouba and fiona steele found two other artifacts. the first is what jamie identified as a rose head spike. this was basically used as a nail in buildings and ships, and she estimated the date in the 1700s. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING ARTIFACT/FEATURE ANALYSIS Dec 13, 2023
this was basically used as a nail in buildings and ships, and she estimated the date in the 1700s. the second artifact was speculated to be a handle to a shovel or some tool. the date on this piece was in the same date range as the spike. the pieces were bagged and tagged and sent to the interpretive center for further testing and analysis. we are then taken to nova tactical in dartmouth, nova scotia where doug crowell and laird niven brought the ramrod guide that was found on lot 5 by gary drayton in a previous episode. they met with jeff parker, who was identified as a weapons expert. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING ARTIFACT/FEATURE ANALYSIS Dec 13, 2023
they met with jeff parker, who was identified as a weapons expert. jeff examined the artifact and agreed that it was indeed a ramrod guide. he stated that he thought it was from a flintlock handgun (pistol) or rifle. he also stated that he did not know what the markings, that looked like roman numerals, were that are on the artifact. he dated the piece from the 1500s through the 1700s. this launched speculation that it was connected to william phips because of the dating suggested by mr. parker. the scene shifted to the interpretive center, where the teams archeometalurgist, emma culligan, presented the results of the two artifacts that were sent to her. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING ARTIFACT/FEATURE ANALYSIS Dec 13, 2023
the interpretive center, where the teams archeometalurgist, emma culligan, presented the results of the two artifacts that were sent to her. emma stated that the rose head spike, which was identified as a nail on its bag, was hand forged and dated in the 1700s. the other artifact discovered was listed as indeterminant object on the bag. it was suggested it was a handle of a tool at the excavation site. emma said it was iron and had a similar date to the spike. emma also revealed that both artifacts have the same chemical composition as the previously discovered iron latch or raft spike. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING ARTIFACT/FEATURE ANALYSIS Dec 13, 2023
emma also revealed that both artifacts have the same chemical composition as the previously discovered iron latch or raft spike. these pieces all matched the composition of the artifacts that were analyzed from the william phips site in maine. this identification of a composition match with the phips area artifacts launched the speculation that it supports the phips theory regarding oak island. it was suggested that because phips came back to britain with less treasure after his second expedition to the sunken treasure site of the concepion, that william phips and andrew belcher hid looted treasure on oak island. unfortunately, recorded history reveals that the treasure sites location had become known to other treasure hunters and had been pilfered and worked considerably by the time that phips returned, which explains his lower yield. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING ARTIFACT/FEATURE ANALYSIS Dec 13, 2023
other treasure hunters and had been pilfered and worked considerably by the time that phips returned, which explains his lower yield. it should be noted that just because these recently found artifacts had the same chemical composition as the phips site artifacts in maine, does not necessarily mean phips was on oak island. these items were british and sent to the american colonies. maine and nova scotia are in close proximity to each other, and it is known that both areas received the same goods imported from britain. the dating of these artifacts could be older than the late 1600s. the dating could be to the mid to late 1700s, which is consistent with the other artifacts being found all around the lot 5 excavation site. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E6: THE GRAND OPENING ARTIFACT/FEATURE ANALYSIS Dec 13, 2023
in last nights episode, the great flood, blacksmith carmen legge visits the interpretive center to give his opinion on a couple of recent finds from lot 5. first, carmen examined the rose head spike/nail that was found at the circular depression area and excavation site. carmen stated that he believes it is a handmade spike that was used to hold down decking on a ship. he called it a scupper nail. he said it was as early as the 16th century. carmen explained that these nails would be repurposed and used on other ships. carmen then examined the other artifact that was found at the same location on lot 5. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 20, 2023
carmen then examined the other artifact that was found at the same location on lot 5. this piece was thought to be a handle to a tool. carmen stated that he believes it is a handle to a ladle. this ladle could have been for domestic use, but it could have also been for shipbuilding. it would have been used to pour pine tar in the making of ships. carmen believes that these artifacts are related to the shipbuilding industry. emma culligan mentioned that the spike/nail had chlorine in its composition, and craig tester said that was from salt water. this chemical analysis also suggests shipbuilding or ship repair activity. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 20, 2023
this chemical analysis also suggests shipbuilding or ship repair activity. the scene shifted to the lot 5 excavation area where jack begley and the other archeologists were working at the circular depression area. archeologist, helen sheldon remarked that they have been finding pipe stems in the excavation, which would indicate multiple people at the site. she also said that there has been a lack of nails that have been found which may suggest that the site was home to a log cabin. coincidentally, jack discovers another rose head spike/nail while sifting. archeologist jamie kouba then discovers what they believe is a strap hinge. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 20, 2023
archeologist jamie kouba then discovers what they believe is a strap hinge. these, along with some of the other artifacts discovered at the site suggest shipbuilding activity. as carmen legge mentioned, these spikes/nails were re-used several times so that could explain why a large number havent been concentrated in one area at the work site. how could shipbuilding activity have happened on lot 5? we dont have to look any farther than the first lot owner of lot 5, timonthy lynch, to get a clearer picture. timothy lynch was born in 1735 in ireland and emigrated to halifax nova scotia. he married bridget bulkeley on september 29, 1761, in halifax. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 20, 2023
he married bridget bulkeley on september 29, 1761, in halifax. bridget died march 1, 1763, after a little over a year of marriage. lynch remarried mary steele on february 1, 1764, in falmouth, nova scotia. steeles family was from jersey and came to massachusetts initially then to halifax with the new england planters. lynch moved to falmouth from halifax and took mary with him and were married there. it is noted that marys father, joseph purchased land in falmouth after their marriage. the couple had nine children all born in chester, nova scotia: mary lynch born 1768 -1809, edward lynch born 1770-1824, sarah lynch born 1773-1774, john lynch born 1775-1807, daniel lynch born 1777-1811, sarah lynch born 1779, susannah lynch born 1781-1825, james lynch born 1786, and catherine lynch born 1788. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 20, 2023
daniel lynch born 1777-1811, sarah lynch born 1779, susannah lynch born 1781-1825, james lynch born 1786, and catherine lynch born 1788. the lynch family moved from falmouth to chester, nova scotia around 1765. timothy lynch drew for lot 5 and then purchased lot 19 on oak island from edward smith for 5 pounds sterling on march 8, 1768. both men lived in chester. casper wollenhaupt of lunenburg owned the neighboring lot 18, site of the money pit. it has been suggested that wollenhaupt had a shipbuilding operation going on at oak island, but theres never been any evidence to corroborate this claim. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 20, 2023
that wollenhaupt had a shipbuilding operation going on at oak island, but theres never been any evidence to corroborate this claim. it appears that may be changing. timothy lynch is listed as a ships carpenter at the age of 56 on the 1791 poll tax for chester and his son edward was listed as a ships master at the age of 21. in some records lynch is also listed as a blacksmith. lynch owned lot 5 for an unspecified period of time then sold both lot 5 and lot 19 to robert melvin that was recorded in 1784. it should be noted that lynch also owned many properties and incurred a lot of debt. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 20, 2023
it should be noted that lynch also owned many properties and incurred a lot of debt. he was taken to court many times over unpaid debt and defaulted on many mortgages. he was dealing with many of the other oak island lot owners but also with others from halifax and lunenburg. timothy lynch died march 28, 1796, in chester. interestingly, captain james anderson also died in 1796 in jamaica in what appears to have been smuggling/privateering activity. lynchs son, daniel married andersons daughter, eunice. what exactly was lynch up to? this is developing research and compendium investigations will update you on our ongoing investigation into timothy lynch. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E7: THE GREAT FLOOD ARTIFACT ANALYSIS Dec 20, 2023
in last nights episode, a void at all costs, the beginning of the episode discusses the torrential rains that hit the island last summer and the effects it had on search operations. the lot 5 excavation had a significant amount of water that had to be drained and the area dried out before the archeologists could resume their work. in the meantime, at the interpretive center, blacksmith carmen legge paid a visit to give his opinion on a couple of artifacts that were uncovered previously at the lot 5 excavation site. the first artifact that carmen inspected was identified as an iron strap. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COSTS ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 3,2024
the first artifact that carmen inspected was identified as an iron strap. carmen had some difficulty analyzing the piece, so he asked emma culligan to show him a scan of the object. after seeing the scan carmen said he believed it was a clasp off a chest or trunk. he estimated that it was a small piece approximately 12 x 12 inches in his opinion. carmen said he believed it was from the 1600-1700s, which appears to be the date range of most of the artifacts that have been coming from the excavation area. the second piece that carmen inspected is what was previously identified as an iron fastener. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COSTS ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 3,2024
the second piece that carmen inspected is what was previously identified as an iron fastener. again, carmen asks emma for a picture of the scan so he can better make out the details and give a more accurate assessment. carmen identifies the piece as a nail and mentions that it was very crude, and the head was not ornamental in any way. he said it was used for a crude purpose and probably for a structure. this would indicate a wooden structure. he dates this nail similarly to the clasp from the early 1600s to 1700s. emma mentions the chemical composition is similar to the other phips era related artifacts. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COSTS ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 3,2024
emma mentions the chemical composition is similar to the other phips era related artifacts. the scene shifts to the lot 5 excavation site, where archeologist moya macdonald discovers an artifact that archeologist helen sheldon inspects and states that it is a barrel strap that consists of copper and iron. jack begley mentions that they have found many pieces of barrels including barrel straps, barrel hoops, and pieces of barrels in other parts of the island and then speculation that it may be related to treasure in the money pit. carmen legge previously estimated that barrel pieces he analyzed could go back as far as the 1400s to the 1800s. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COSTS ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 3,2024
carmen legge previously estimated that barrel pieces he analyzed could go back as far as the 1400s to the 1800s. archaeologist laird niven visits the other archeologists working at the lot 5 excavation site and discusses the structure. archeologist jamie kouba mentions that it appears there was a rock wall of a structure that seems to have collapsed or was destroyed at the site in her opinion. laird states that it is a possibility. it seems that the work is taking the team into another section of the structure. the team is finding nails and door pieces and an outline of a larger structure. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COSTS ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 3,2024
the team is finding nails and door pieces and an outline of a larger structure. it appears to have been some sort of habitation or structure that was abandoned and filled in to hide its existence. why would anyone want to hide their activity on oak island? compendium investigations has previously mentioned joshua mauger, who we believe had an involvement with oak island. the many barrel pieces that have been found in great quantity suggest to the compendium that a smuggling operation of goods being shipped was being conducted on oak island. why? in british north america, smuggling was rampant. the black market dealt with west indian molasses that was needed to distill rum and was a major part of the triangle slave trade. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COSTS ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 3,2024
dealt with west indian molasses that was needed to distill rum and was a major part of the triangle slave trade. this included other commodities including sugar, tea, rum, and other necessities. this allowed the colonies to balance their deficits with the british empire. the british wanted american colonists to buy british goods, and not from other counties. colonists paid duties on these imported goods to discourage this other trade. smuggling was how colonists ignored these restrictions. joshua mauger was the victualler for the royal navy at the fortress of louisbourg around 1747 until the french were given back the fort. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COSTS ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 3,2024
the victualler for the royal navy at the fortress of louisbourg around 1747 until the french were given back the fort. in 1749, mauger relocated to halifax at its founding. captain mauger had a fishery and was engaged as a merchant, distiller, slave trader, smuggler, and privateer. he had close ties to mahone bay and with many people directly involved with the area. this included ephraim cook, john rous, thomas lewis, and particularly oak island lot owner, jonathan prescott. governor edward cornwallis confronted mauger regarding his suspicious business practices which included trading with the french at louisbourg after the transfer in occupation. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COSTS ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 3,2024
cornwallis confronted mauger regarding his suspicious business practices which included trading with the french at louisbourg after the transfer in occupation. in the fall of 1749, mauger received sundry merchandise and stores from louisbourg. mauger manipulated the situation to avoid the trade restrictions imposed by cornwallis, who was anxious to sever all ties with the french. in 1750, mauger had permission to land ten hogsheads of wine from louisbourg, but cornwallis ordered him to return 22 hogsheads. he charged that mauger was making halifax a repository for goods from louisbourg. in november 1751, cornwallis ordered the seizure of a ship carrying contraband from louisbourg and accused mauger of receiving the goods. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COSTS ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 3,2024
in november 1751, cornwallis ordered the seizure of a ship carrying contraband from louisbourg and accused mauger of receiving the goods. his warehouse was searched, and rum was confiscated. cornwallis wanted the board of trade to replace mauger as victualler to the royal navy. he was concerned that nova scotia would become a rendezvous for smugglers. mauger had powerful connections and continued his business practices. it is conceivable that through his business network, mauger was using oak island as a link in his smuggling enterprise. in last weeks drilling down episode, doug crowell mentioned that the team had found a part of an old french wine bottle at the lot 5 excavation site. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E8: A VOID AT ALL COSTS ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 3,2024
in last nights episode, filling cavities, at the lot 5 excavation area, the archeologists and alex lagina are working and discover a couple of artifacts. the first is what appears to be a small ring, but the team is unable to estimate a possible date. it is tagged and bagged and will be sent to emma culligan for further testing. the other artifact is what archeologist jamie kouba described as a decorative piece of metal that was perhaps off a wooden door or chest. it is suggested that this may have to do with privateering, which archeologist fiona steele mentions that there has been a lot of evidence to suggest privateering activity in this area. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
privateering, which archeologist fiona steele mentions that there has been a lot of evidence to suggest privateering activity in this area. at the swamp, work commenced after it had been drained near the stone road feature where gary drayton and alex lagina are metal detecting. gary finds what appears to be a dowel and it is suggested that this dowel was similar to ones found at the u-shape structure over at smiths cove. it is suggested that perhaps there was a similar type of structure built in the swamp for loading and unloading of cargo. back at the lot 5 excavation area, the archeologists have marked the boundary of the large rectangular feature that was shown on the magnometer readings. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
5 excavation area, the archeologists have marked the boundary of the large rectangular feature that was shown on the magnometer readings. it measures 30ft x 45ft approximately. they suggested that this structure was possibly taken down and hidden before the island was surveyed by charles morris in 1762. they said that it appears that the rocks found at the site were used to fill in the area and were not part of a wall. while they continued to work, they found a piece of engraved stone that was very peculiar and engraved with a line on both sides of the stone. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
found a piece of engraved stone that was very peculiar and engraved with a line on both sides of the stone. they are unsure of what exactly it is and stated that they have never seen anything like it before, as it has rounded edges, evidence of being worked by man. jack suggests it is part of the original money pit construction. the scene shifted back to the swamp area at the stone road feature where gary again is metal detecting with alex lagina. this time gary has a detector hit and uncovers what appears to be a chain and a hook. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
this time gary has a detector hit and uncovers what appears to be a chain and a hook. gary mentions he thinks the chain is hand forged and old. this leads to speculation that the chain and hook were used to load and unload cargo from a ship, specifically treasure chests. the artifacts will be sent to emma culligan for further testing at the interpretive center and it appears blacksmith, carmen legge will be giving his opinion of them on next weeks show. oak island researcher scott clarke visited the war room to present some of his research from his new book, oak island odyssey. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
island researcher scott clarke visited the war room to present some of his research from his new book, oak island odyssey. scott begins by mentioning that his ancestor, andrew belcher, was perhaps one of the earliest freemasons in north america and he believes that he buried treasure on oak island. the narrator describes a masonic generational conspiracy regarding oak island and the belcher family had secret knowledge of what was buried there. scott then suggests that charles morris, the surveyor of nova scotia in the 1760s, may have received directives from jonathan belcher, jr., andrews grandson, to survey oak island into lots so that the buried treasure could be protected. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
directives from jonathan belcher, jr., andrews grandson, to survey oak island into lots so that the buried treasure could be protected. scott goes on to mention that jonathan belcher, jr. was the chief justice of the supreme court of nova scotia and the grandmaster of freemasonry in the province. scott then produces a map of mahone bay that he said he found at the nova scotia archives. he mentions that it was made by charles morris in 1762 and he noticed some interesting features on it. first, he said that the first a in mahone has a design of the masonic compass. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
first, he said that the first a in mahone has a design of the masonic compass. scott goes on to suggest that this specific a has sometimes been associated with the fabled holy grail. scott shows that this a points directly at oak island and suggests the grail may be there or may have been hidden there at one time. it is also stated that these as are found in locations in portugal and italy with known templar ties. scott then states he found more of these as at st. margarets bay on the map, which is the neighboring bay to mahone bay. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
margarets bay on the map, which is the neighboring bay to mahone bay. scott then draws a circle connecting these as and shows that his circle runs though oak island, scott believes this indicates a correlation with something like the holy grail, being hidden on oak island by freemasons. charles morris was surveyor general for the province of nova scotia from 1749 to 1781. he was instrumental in the founding of halifax and lunenburg and the arrival of the new england planters to populate nova scotia. morris was a very busy man, mapping, surveying the entire province and helping to launch many settlements for the incoming settlers. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
morris was a very busy man, mapping, surveying the entire province and helping to launch many settlements for the incoming settlers. in 1761, lt. governor jonathan belcher sent the board of trade, who was in control of all of britains colonial plans, some of morriss maps. in early 1762, belcher sent morris report of new settlements and several towns. morris assessments described the natural resources of the townships and how they were to be used in the future. later in 1762, the shoreham land grant, which included oak island, was approved by morris, and the island was divided into 32 four acre lots. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
shoreham land grant, which included oak island, was approved by morris, and the island was divided into 32 four acre lots. in 1763, morris was forced to tell the new england planters at maugerville that their lands were reserved for the military. maugerville was located on the st. john river in present day new brunswick, then part of nova scotia. morris supported the new englander planters staying. he wrote to joshua mauger, the provincial agent of nova scotia in london, asking him to use his influence with the board of trade to allow them to stay and was successful. this was the type of influence that mauger wielded in nova scotia, and he used his power to undermine anyone that stood in his way. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
of influence that mauger wielded in nova scotia, and he used his power to undermine anyone that stood in his way. this included jonathan belcher. belcher was the grandmaster of freemasonry in nova scotia at the time, but mauger, who was also a freemason, was the person who decided what happened in the province. belcher would become closely aligned with mauger as the years went on and effectively was under maugers control. the question becomes, was mauger behind oak island being divided into lots to protect his smuggling/privateering operation from being discovered, and used his fellow freemasons belcher and morris to do so? 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
into lots to protect his smuggling/privateering operation from being discovered, and used his fellow freemasons belcher and morris to do so? scott clarkes discovery of the masonic as on the 1762 map is very interesting. the compendium checked out various maps completed by morris and concur that there are no other maps with these types of as that were located so far. was it just a stylized design morris used because he was a freemason, or is there something more going on here? it was mentioned in the episode that there may have been a masonic generational conspiracy over time regarding oak island. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
it was mentioned in the episode that there may have been a masonic generational conspiracy over time regarding oak island. on the surface this seems hard to believe, but the compendium thinks that there may be substance to this idea. in fact, our research indicates that the involvement of freemasons with the island goes back very far and continues to this day. the compendium will be completing a future investigation into this subject later in 2024. another map by charles morris has been located that has the identical "a" written on it. it is from morris\' 1755 map of nova scotia. 	Spino and Wheatley S11E9: FILLING CAVITIES ARTIFACT AND FEATURE ANALYSIS Jan 11, 2024
our series will investigate the possibility that a stone found in 2018 is the original 90ft stone that was removed from john smiths chimney/fireplace and discarded on oak island featuring new updated information. in 2018, gyro survey expert tory martin was near the money pit, in the hollow by the old well, when he saw a stone next to a tree. he noticed strange markings on the stone because it was wet. it piqued torys interest enough that he let the oak island team know about it, and it was nicknamed the tory stone. a cx laser scan indicated that the stones carvings produced an apparent script. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
a cx laser scan indicated that the stones carvings produced an apparent script. doug crowell commented that it resembled a runic script called futhark, or elder futhark. the tory stone was presented to dr. lila kopr of the catholic university and her opinion was that the script was not runic. she suggested it was another type of script perhaps gothic and could be a piece of architecture. it was noted that the tory stone looked broken, and another piece may still be on oak island. in reviewing extensive information regarding the tory stone, it occurred to us that the stone looks like something that may have come out of john smiths fireplace/chimney, which would make it the original 90ft stone. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
stone looks like something that may have come out of john smiths fireplace/chimney, which would make it the original 90ft stone. during our research, this hypothesis has become more and more likely. what attracted our attention to the tory stone are the unusual deep markings and unique pattern that resembled the original description of the 90ft stone. it should be noted that several geologists have looked at the tory stone and suspect that its markings were made naturally. this led the compendium to start researching the story of the original 90ft stone to try to understand its history, legitimacy and possible whereabouts. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
compendium to start researching the story of the original 90ft stone to try to understand its history, legitimacy and possible whereabouts. in the october 1862 liverpool transcript, the 90ft. stone was mentioned. j.b. (jotham blanchard) mccully, of the oak island association, wrote a response to an article that was critical of their treasure hunting efforts on oak island. that article was entitled the oak island folly by someone identified as patrick the digger. mccully related the events regarding the first operation by the onslow company in 1802. he stated, they commenced where the first left off, and sunk the pit 93 feet, finding a mark every ten feet. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
he stated, they commenced where the first left off, and sunk the pit 93 feet, finding a mark every ten feet. some of them were charcoal, some putty, and one at 80 feet was a stone cut square, two feet long and about a foot thick, with several characters on it." it is unclear if this was an exact measurement or approximation, but it became the standard description for the 90 ft stones size over time. about a year later, it was reported that the stone was found in the chimney of a house on oak island. the anonymous january 1864 article in the british colonist stated that the 1802 operation discovered, a flag stone about two feet long and one (foot) wide, with a number of rudely cut letters and figures upon it. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
flag stone about two feet long and one (foot) wide, with a number of rudely cut letters and figures upon it. they were in hopes the inscription would throw some valuable light on their search, but unfortunately they could not decipher it, as it was either too badly cut or did not appear to be in their own vernacularthis remarkable stone was pretty far down in the pit, laying in the centre with the engraved side down. as it was preserved in the family of mr. smith it may be seen by the curious at the present day. this article sparked the curiosity of john hunter-duvar of the historical society of nova scotia. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
the curious at the present day. this article sparked the curiosity of john hunter-duvar of the historical society of nova scotia. in january 1864, hunter-duvar wrote to george cooke, who wrote the previous anonymous story. cooke was a member of the oak island association, which was working on the island at the time. hunter-duvar wrote: sir, an interesting sketch of the oak island enterprise appears in the colonist newspaper of this morning, and of which i believe you are the author. you mention a flagstone bearing an inscription was found and it was preserved in the family of mr. smith it may be seen by the curious at the present day. may i beg, in the name of the society, to be favored with the name of the person in whose possession the stone is, as, if authentic, it cannot fail to be important as a historical object. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
the person in whose possession the stone is, as, if authentic, it cannot fail to be important as a historical object. i have the honor to be sir, your most obedient servant. j hunter duvar corr. sec. cooke replied that john smith told him that around 1824, he built a new house near the money pit area and he put the 90ft stone in the back corner of his chimney. no operations had gone on in nearly 20 years and the stone was put in with the carved side out for all to see. cooke wrote that smith showed him the stone in 1849/1850 during the first truro company operation. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
cooke wrote that smith showed him the stone in 1849/1850 during the first truro company operation. cooke stated that the house was currently being rented by the oak island association from anthony graves during their operation. he said that the fireplace/chimney had become boxed around by wood forming a staircase and the stone was not visible anymore. this would have happened sometime between 1850 and 1857, when smith passed away. more importantly, this letter written by cooke gave a firsthand eyewitness report of the 90ft stone, not a second or third hand like previous reports. cooke goes on to say, at the time i saw the stone i noticed that there were some rudely cut letters, figures or characters upon it. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
at the time i saw the stone i noticed that there were some rudely cut letters, figures or characters upon it. i cannot recollect which, but they appear as if they had been scraped out by a blunt instrument, rather than cut with a sharp one. this provides a better description of the carvings. he doesnt mention any dimensions, presumably because it was built into the fireplace. the description of the script looking like it had been scraped out by a blunt instrument, rather than cut with a sharp one, made the compendium think of the tory stone because the description seems to apply perfectly to it. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
with a sharp one, made the compendium think of the tory stone because the description seems to apply perfectly to it. in the oak island mystery, r.v. harris writes, about 1865-1866 the stone was removed and taken to halifax. among those who worked to remove the stone was one jefferson w. macdonald, who told mr. f. l. blair, in 1894, that the inscription was easily traced, but that no person present could decipher it. apparently no photograph or rubbing was ever made.the stone was brought to halifax by either a.o. or herbert creighton of a. and h. creighton, bookbinders, 64 upper water street, halifax,... 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
or herbert creighton of a. and h. creighton, bookbinders, 64 upper water street, halifax,... and it was exhibited in the shop window when the company was endeavoring to sell shares. it is said that james liechti, a professor of languages (1866-1906) at dalhousie college, expressed his opinion that the inscription meant ten feet below two million pounds lie buried but most people were skeptical respecting this version, because of the concurrent efforts being made to sell stock. did macdonald leave the real stone in the hollow by the well after it was removed from john smiths fireplace? in 1864, the oak island association was undergoing money problems. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
in 1864, the oak island association was undergoing money problems. the money pit had degraded so badly that it was deemed unsafe and work was suspended. the oak island association ended in 1865 and the oak island eldorado company was formed in 1866. augustus oliver (a.o.) creighton was involved with both companies. james lietchi was a tutor in foreign languages at dalhousie university in halifax beginning in 1865. he was promoted to professor in 1883. lietchi taught french and german. one of lietchis prized students in 1865-1868 was james aylwin creighton, who was a cousin of a.o. and herbert creighton. according to doug crowell, lietchi also taught members of the pitblado family who were also involved with the oak island mystery. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
according to doug crowell, lietchi also taught members of the pitblado family who were also involved with the oak island mystery. was professor lietchi referred to the creightons by their cousin james? based on our research, compendium investigations believes its extremely likely that lietchi was involved with creating a cipher inscription that was put on a new stone and displayed in the window at creightons bookbinders. why would the compendium entertain such an idea? if the oak island association was aware of the possibility of the original stone having natural markings, they may have panicked when the stone became the center of attention of the historical society of nova scotia. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
natural markings, they may have panicked when the stone became the center of attention of the historical society of nova scotia. if the carvings were determined to be natural, it would not be in the best interest of the association to make that publicly known. its very possible that it was decided that the original stone needed to be discarded and another stone with a more discernible cipher inscription used for treasure hunting and investor attracting purposes. the compendium will reveal more evidence to support this idea during the course of our investigation. join us next week for part two. please visit www theoakislandcompendium.com for the entire article and all of our content regarding the oak island mystery. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART ONE. Feb 13, 2024
in part one, the compendium reviewed early reports of the 90ft stone and the first eyewitness description that corresponded perfectly with the tory stone. james lietchi was introduced as the prime suspect for being involved with the famous 90ft stone cipher. its suspected that lietchi was referred to the creightons by their cousin james creighton, who was a student of lietchis at dalhousie college. this brings us to another member of dalhousies faculty at the exact same time. in 1872, james demille authored treasure of the seas. he writes this describing the 90ft stone, they went to work and dug away for a little distance, when they came to something hard. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
describing the 90ft stone, they went to work and dug away for a little distance, when they came to something hard. it was a stone hewn, - not very smooth, - a kind of sandstone, and on this they saw some marks that looked like strange letters. they were ignorant men, but they knew the alphabet, and they knew that this was no kind of english letters at all; but it seemed to them that they might be letters of some strange alphabet. they took this stone away, and it has been preserved ever since, and it is there yet on the island, built into the wall of a cottage there for safe keeping. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
ever since, and it is there yet on the island, built into the wall of a cottage there for safe keeping. thats what i mean when i say ive seen the traces of captain kidd, for its my solemn conviction that he cut that inscription on the stone in some foreign letters, or perhaps some secret cipher. then theres that stone with the mysterious inscription. its been seen by hundreds. no one has ever been found yet who can make out what it means. as i said before, it is either some foreign language, or else, as is quite probable, it is some secret cipher, known only to kidd himself.they have the impudence to say that it isnt an inscription at all. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
is some secret cipher, known only to kidd himself.they have the impudence to say that it isnt an inscription at all. actually, because no one can decipher it, they say it aint an inscription! they say its only some accidental scratches! now, i allow, continued the landlord, that the marks are rather faint, and irregular; but how can any man look at them, and say they are not an inscription  how can any man look at them and say that theyre accidental scratches  is a thing that makes me fairly dumb with amazement. demille was a popular canadian author and professor of rhetoric/english/history at dalhousie college. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
thing that makes me fairly dumb with amazement. demille was a popular canadian author and professor of rhetoric/english/history at dalhousie college. demille was a colleague of lietchi\'s and both were hired together in 1865. most of demilles stories were fiction but many contained real people and real events. its clear that demille had knowledge of oak island, having lived in the area and spending summers in chester. in treasure of the seas, oak island is mentioned prominently, and names the kind of stone found in the money pit as a type of sandstone. amazingly, the tory stone was identified as greywacke by terry matheson, which is a type of sandstone. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
amazingly, the tory stone was identified as greywacke by terry matheson, which is a type of sandstone. demille writes that people say because the stone is undecipherable its not an inscription. theyre accidental scratches and have marks that are faint and irregular. but if you really look hard, its an inscription. this seems to be another dead-on description of the tory stone and mirrors modern day conversations about it. the compendium believes its very likely that both demille and lietchi inspected the markings on the tory stone. a big influence on demille was edgar allan poe. research suggests that poe knew information about oak island and incorporated some of its details in his work. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
research suggests that poe knew information about oak island and incorporated some of its details in his work. the gold bug was published in 1843 and tells the story of a treasure hunt that involves three men, an oak tree, and a cipher on an island associated with captain kidd. demille would have undoubtedly noticed these similarities with oak island\'s story. demille mentions captain kidd in the treasure of the seas as the source of a secret cipher to which only kidd knew the solution. in the old dying sailor story that is often mentioned in relation to oak island it states, ... 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
in the old dying sailor story that is often mentioned in relation to oak island it states, ... that many years before he has assisted that noted pirate and his followers in burying over two million (pounds) beneath the secluded island, east of boston. two million pounds are the keywords that connect the 90ft stone cipher to captain kidd, which was reportedly translated by lietchi as, ten feet below two million pounds lie buried. demille had experience with ciphers and featured them in his work. demilles background, expertise, and knowledge make him a prime suspect for involvement with the stone and cipher along with lietchi. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
demilles background, expertise, and knowledge make him a prime suspect for involvement with the stone and cipher along with lietchi. according to, the oak island treasure\'\' by charles b. driscoll, 1929, the 90ft stone was on display at creightons bookbindery, it was then taken to the home of j. b. mcculley in truro, where it was exhibited to hundreds of friends of the mcculleys, who became interested in a later treasure company. somehow the stone fell into the hands of a bookbinder, who used it as a base upon which to beat leather for many years. a generation later, with the inscription nearly worn away, the stone found its way to a book store in halifax... by 1867, the oak island eldorado company ceased operations and dissolved. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
stone found its way to a book store in halifax... by 1867, the oak island eldorado company ceased operations and dissolved. the stone at creightons was apparently moved to truro, nova scotia by j. b. mccully. according to genealogical records, the compendium noticed a creighton family member with the middle name of mccully, as the families were friends and linked by oak island. at this point it appears the stone was no longer needed since a.o. creighton didnt have an ongoing interest in the treasure hunt. it wasnt until 1893 when the oak island treasure company started their efforts that the stone strangely reappeared at creightons. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
it wasnt until 1893 when the oak island treasure company started their efforts that the stone strangely reappeared at creightons. on september 27, 1935, harry marshall states, one of the creightons was interested in the oak island treasure co. and had brought to the city a stone which i well remember seeing as a boy, and until the business was merged in 1919 in the present firm of phillips and marshall. the stone was about 2 feet long, 15 inches wide, and 10 inches thick, and weighed about 175 pounds. it had two smooth surfaces, with rough sides with traces of cement attached to them the corners were not squared but somewhat rounded. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
two smooth surfaces, with rough sides with traces of cement attached to them the corners were not squared but somewhat rounded. the block resembled dark swedish granite or fine grained porphyry, very hard, and with an olive tinge, and did not resemble any local stonewhile in creightons possession some lad had cut his initials j.m. on one corner, but apart from this there was no evidence of any inscription either cut or painted on the stone. creighton used the stone for a beating stone and weightwhen marshall left the premises in 1919, the stone was left behind... the oak island treasure company began operations in 1893 when harry marshall was 13 years old. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
the stone was left behind... the oak island treasure company began operations in 1893 when harry marshall was 13 years old. the 90ft stones description at this time was very different from other descriptions. its certain that this stone was not the original 90 ft stone.captain h.l. bowdoin states in colliers magazine in 1911, while in halifax we examined the stone found in the money pit, the characters on which were supposed to mean: ten feet below two million pounds lie buried. the rock is of a basalt type hard and fine-grainedthere never were any characters on the rock found in the money pit. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
rock is of a basalt type hard and fine-grainedthere never were any characters on the rock found in the money pit. because: (a) the rock, being hard, they could not wear off. (b) there are a few scratches, etc., made by creightons employees, as they acknowledged, but there is not, and never was, a system of characters carved on the stone. it appears this was a working stone that was used as a prop and substituted for the 90ft stone. the absence of any inscriptions or evidence of any ever being on it, precludes it from being the original. the compendium believes that the story of the beating of leather on the stone that wore off the inscription was contrived. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
the compendium believes that the story of the beating of leather on the stone that wore off the inscription was contrived. compendium investigations believes that doug crowell found this last "working stone" in the basement of the nova scotia college of art and design, the old creighton bookbindery, in 2018. the compendium believes a total of three stones were involved in this oak island subterfuge. the original (tory stone), 2nd (cipher stone) and 3rd (working stone). join us next week for part three as compendium investigations digs deeper into the background of james lietchi and the reverend a.t. kempton. please visit http://www.theoakislandcompendium.com for the entire article, part one in the series, and all our other content regarding the oak island mystery. 	Spino and Wheatley THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART TWO Feb 20, 2024
last week in part two, the compendium revealed the suspected involvement of professor james demille with the tory stone, and the fact that his description of it matches the 90 ft stone perfectly in his book, treasure of the seas. the relationship between demilles story and captain kidd being tied to oak island was shown. this is illustrated in the 90ft stone cipher message that indicates two million pounds being buried. we detailed the movements of the stone and what appears to be three different stones involved in this subterfuge. this leads us to the first appearance of the mysterious cipher that has been associated with the legendary 90ft. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
this leads us to the first appearance of the mysterious cipher that has been associated with the legendary 90ft. stone. it can be traced to mysteries and adventures along the atlantic coast, 1948, by edward rowe snow. in his book snow writes, the mystery grew stranger and stranger, but when the ninety-foot mark was reached, the greatest mystery of all awaited the diggers. it was a round, flat stone, about three feet high and sixteen inches wide. on the face of the stone curious characters had been cut. (cipher is shown) reverend a. t. kempton of cambridge, massachusetts, believes that an old irish schoolmaster worked out the code and translated the inscription to read, letter for letter, as follows: forty feet below two million pounds are buried. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
the code and translated the inscription to read, letter for letter, as follows: forty feet below two million pounds are buried. however, it is only fair to state that there are many who claim that the above inscription was not the one found on the stone this warning about the ciphers legitimacy was not included in the original story that was given to edward rowe snow by reverend a.t. kempton. was snow giving a clue that this inscription was not the original one on the real 90ft. stone? frederick blair was interviewed for snows book and then contacted reverend a.t. kempton after reading it. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
stone? frederick blair was interviewed for snows book and then contacted reverend a.t. kempton after reading it. snow and reverend kempton were distant cousins that can trace their ancestry back to the mayflower. kempton wrote to blair in 1949 and provided him with the original story that he acquired. he said that at one time he was going to write a book with various stories about acadia. he goes on, i wrote a minister whom (that) i knew at the time and asked him if he knew of someone who would write me a good account of oak island. he got a school teacher long since dead. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
he got a school teacher long since dead. the minister died years ago. he sent me the mss. (manuscript) and i paid him for it. i never wrote the book. i had never pub. (published) the oak island story. () the teacher who wrote my mss. (manuscript) did not give me any proofs of his statements-only that the (stone) was found and (several) characters were cut in the stone and a very bright irish teacher had worked out this statement as printed in snows book. several years after he sent me the mss. (manuscript) i went to mahone bay to find the teacher. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
several years after he sent me the mss. (manuscript) i went to mahone bay to find the teacher. but he had died. i learned that the stone was in the historical society at halifax. i went there several times but never found anyone who could tell me about the stone. so i let the matter drop until i showed it to ed. snow and he set it in his book. that is about all i can tell you. () a. t. kempton. frederick blair wrote to kempton on april 29, 1949, dear mr. kempton: thank you very much for your recent letter with the story of oak island enclosed. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
kempton: thank you very much for your recent letter with the story of oak island enclosed. it was very interesting, but considerable of it is far from the facts as i understand them to be, while there is confirmation to a considerable degree. again thank you, i am yours truly, frederick blair. in reviewing reverend a.t. kemptons story, it reveals that there is a remarkable correlation between it and professor james demilles treasure of the seas. in both stories it talks about a father and son finding the money pit. this detail is in no other version associated with the discovery of the money pit. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
this detail is in no other version associated with the discovery of the money pit. if professor lietchi was in fact the author of kemptons story, then it seems very likely that he borrowed this detail from his colleague and collaborator professor james demille. edward rowe snow used only a small portion of kemptons story. snow used the exact same description of the 90 ft stone being 3 feet long and 16 inches wide and the translation of the stone being, forty feet below two million pounds are buried. this deviated from the long-held translation of ten feet being the distance. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
this deviated from the long-held translation of ten feet being the distance. it should be noted that snow deleted six characters from the cipher that reverend a.t. kempton sent him. this was never explained by snow or kempton. the identity of the schoolteacher, minister and old irish school master were left anonymous by kempton in his letter. who were they? kempton mentions that the minister was someone he knew who had found a schoolteacher that would write the story about oak island and kempton paid them for it. kempton never reveals the schoolteachers identity. why? the most logical reason is that the schoolteacher asked to remain anonymous to the public. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
why? the most logical reason is that the schoolteacher asked to remain anonymous to the public. why would they do that? to avoid publicity and people asking them endless questions? perhaps. maybe to hide something they were involved with in the past? or maybe to protect someone elses identity and reputation? we also know that the schoolteacher lived in the mahone bay area since kempton states he went there many years earlier to see them and they were dead. we can also speculate that the minister was from the mahone bay area or very familiar with it. perhaps the schoolteacher was a member of the ministers congregation and thats how they were identified to write the story? 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
perhaps the schoolteacher was a member of the ministers congregation and thats how they were identified to write the story? the prime suspect for the identity of the schoolteacher is professor james lietchi. according to the lives of dalhousie university, volume one, 1818-1925: lord dalhousie\'s college by p.b. waiteit, it states, at the same time as de mille was appointed, james liechti was hired as tutor in modern languages. liechti was swiss, a lutheran, who had taught french and german in the halifax grammar school for six years. he was liked by students, patient, kind, hardworking. in 1883 he became mcleod professor of modern languages. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
he was liked by students, patient, kind, hardworking. in 1883 he became mcleod professor of modern languages. he survived longer than any of the original old guard; he retired in 1906 to lunenburg and lived until 1925. this piece of information is very important because we learn that professor lietchi was a lutheran and lived in lunenburg. in checking the lutheran churches in lunenburg, we find zion evangelical lutheran church, the oldest lutheran church in canada. in reviewing information regarding the church, it appears that their parishioners were usually buried in the hillcrest cemetery in lunenburg. upon checking, lietchi was indeed buried at hillcrest as was his wife, minna liddy maria cossman liechti. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
upon checking, lietchi was indeed buried at hillcrest as was his wife, minna liddy maria cossman liechti. upon investigating minnas family, we learn that her father was reverend charles ernst cossman. reverend cossman was the leader of zion evangelical lutheran church for 40 years, coming from germany and taking the position in 1835. he retired from zion evangelical in 1876, but he remained active with the church and made guest sermons at various churches, including in halifax. he was a very prominent figure in the religious community in nova scotia. reverend cossman passed away in 1897, so he wasnt the minister that was contacted by reverend a.t. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
reverend cossman passed away in 1897, so he wasnt the minister that was contacted by reverend a.t. kempton. although this explains why professor lietchi would want to keep his involvement with the oak island cipher very quiet for fear of embarrassing the family. the minister at zion from 1901-1914 was william marion weaver. weaver was from pennsylvania and came to lead the church. he most certainly would have known professor lietchi. it is unclear if pastor weaver and reverend a.t. kempton knew each other. weaver was a lutheran and kempton was a baptist. kempton states that the minister died years ago and that was in 1949. 	Spino and Wheatly  THE MYSTERY OF THE 90 FOOT STONE, PART THREE Feb 27,2024
